<<<<<<< Updated upstream
ï»¿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer by Homer
=======
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ulysses, by James Joyce
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ulysses

Author: James Joyce

Posting Date: August 1, 2008 [EBook #4300]
Release Date: July, 2003
[Last updated: November 17, 2011]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ULYSSES ***




Produced by Col Choat





ULYSSES

by James Joyce




-- I --

Stately, plump Buck Mulligan came from the stairhead, bearing a bowl of
lather on which a mirror and a razor lay crossed. A yellow dressinggown,
ungirdled, was sustained gently behind him on the mild morning air. He
held the bowl aloft and intoned:

--_Introibo ad altare Dei_.

Halted, he peered down the dark winding stairs and called out coarsely:

--Come up, Kinch! Come up, you fearful jesuit!

Solemnly he came forward and mounted the round gunrest. He faced about
and blessed gravely thrice the tower, the surrounding land and the
awaking mountains. Then, catching sight of Stephen Dedalus, he bent
towards him and made rapid crosses in the air, gurgling in his throat
and shaking his head. Stephen Dedalus, displeased and sleepy, leaned
his arms on the top of the staircase and looked coldly at the shaking
gurgling face that blessed him, equine in its length, and at the light
untonsured hair, grained and hued like pale oak.

Buck Mulligan peeped an instant under the mirror and then covered the
bowl smartly.

--Back to barracks! he said sternly.

He added in a preacher's tone:

--For this, O dearly beloved, is the genuine Christine: body and soul
and blood and ouns. Slow music, please. Shut your eyes, gents. One
moment. A little trouble about those white corpuscles. Silence, all.

He peered sideways up and gave a long slow whistle of call, then paused
awhile in rapt attention, his even white teeth glistening here and there
with gold points. Chrysostomos. Two strong shrill whistles answered
through the calm.

--Thanks, old chap, he cried briskly. That will do nicely. Switch off
the current, will you?

He skipped off the gunrest and looked gravely at his watcher, gathering
about his legs the loose folds of his gown. The plump shadowed face and
sullen oval jowl recalled a prelate, patron of arts in the middle ages.
A pleasant smile broke quietly over his lips.

--The mockery of it! he said gaily. Your absurd name, an ancient Greek!

He pointed his finger in friendly jest and went over to the parapet,
laughing to himself. Stephen Dedalus stepped up, followed him wearily
halfway and sat down on the edge of the gunrest, watching him still as
he propped his mirror on the parapet, dipped the brush in the bowl and
lathered cheeks and neck.

Buck Mulligan's gay voice went on.

--My name is absurd too: Malachi Mulligan, two dactyls. But it has a
Hellenic ring, hasn't it? Tripping and sunny like the buck himself.
We must go to Athens. Will you come if I can get the aunt to fork out
twenty quid?

He laid the brush aside and, laughing with delight, cried:

--Will he come? The jejune jesuit!

Ceasing, he began to shave with care.

--Tell me, Mulligan, Stephen said quietly.

--Yes, my love?

--How long is Haines going to stay in this tower?

Buck Mulligan showed a shaven cheek over his right shoulder.

--God, isn't he dreadful? he said frankly. A ponderous Saxon. He thinks
you're not a gentleman. God, these bloody English! Bursting with money
and indigestion. Because he comes from Oxford. You know, Dedalus, you
have the real Oxford manner. He can't make you out. O, my name for you
is the best: Kinch, the knife-blade.

He shaved warily over his chin.

--He was raving all night about a black panther, Stephen said. Where is
his guncase?

--A woful lunatic! Mulligan said. Were you in a funk?

--I was, Stephen said with energy and growing fear. Out here in the dark
with a man I don't know raving and moaning to himself about shooting a
black panther. You saved men from drowning. I'm not a hero, however. If
he stays on here I am off.

Buck Mulligan frowned at the lather on his razorblade. He hopped down
from his perch and began to search his trouser pockets hastily.

--Scutter! he cried thickly.

He came over to the gunrest and, thrusting a hand into Stephen's upper
pocket, said:

--Lend us a loan of your noserag to wipe my razor.

Stephen suffered him to pull out and hold up on show by its corner a
dirty crumpled handkerchief. Buck Mulligan wiped the razorblade neatly.
Then, gazing over the handkerchief, he said:

--The bard's noserag! A new art colour for our Irish poets: snotgreen.
You can almost taste it, can't you?

He mounted to the parapet again and gazed out over Dublin bay, his fair
oakpale hair stirring slightly.

--God! he said quietly. Isn't the sea what Algy calls it: a grey
sweet mother? The snotgreen sea. The scrotumtightening sea. _Epi oinopa
ponton_. Ah, Dedalus, the Greeks! I must teach you. You must read them
in the original. _Thalatta! Thalatta_! She is our great sweet mother.
Come and look.

Stephen stood up and went over to the parapet. Leaning on it he looked
down on the water and on the mailboat clearing the harbourmouth of
Kingstown.

--Our mighty mother! Buck Mulligan said.

He turned abruptly his grey searching eyes from the sea to Stephen's
face.

--The aunt thinks you killed your mother, he said. That's why she won't
let me have anything to do with you.

--Someone killed her, Stephen said gloomily.

--You could have knelt down, damn it, Kinch, when your dying mother
asked you, Buck Mulligan said. I'm hyperborean as much as you. But to
think of your mother begging you with her last breath to kneel down and
pray for her. And you refused. There is something sinister in you...

He broke off and lathered again lightly his farther cheek. A tolerant
smile curled his lips.

--But a lovely mummer! he murmured to himself. Kinch, the loveliest
mummer of them all!

He shaved evenly and with care, in silence, seriously.

Stephen, an elbow rested on the jagged granite, leaned his palm against
his brow and gazed at the fraying edge of his shiny black coat-sleeve.
Pain, that was not yet the pain of love, fretted his heart. Silently, in
a dream she had come to him after her death, her wasted body within its
loose brown graveclothes giving off an odour of wax and rosewood, her
breath, that had bent upon him, mute, reproachful, a faint odour of
wetted ashes. Across the threadbare cuffedge he saw the sea hailed as a
great sweet mother by the wellfed voice beside him. The ring of bay
and skyline held a dull green mass of liquid. A bowl of white china had
stood beside her deathbed holding the green sluggish bile which she had
torn up from her rotting liver by fits of loud groaning vomiting.

Buck Mulligan wiped again his razorblade.

--Ah, poor dogsbody! he said in a kind voice. I must give you a shirt
and a few noserags. How are the secondhand breeks?

--They fit well enough, Stephen answered.

Buck Mulligan attacked the hollow beneath his underlip.

--The mockery of it, he said contentedly. Secondleg they should be. God
knows what poxy bowsy left them off. I have a lovely pair with a hair
stripe, grey. You'll look spiffing in them. I'm not joking, Kinch. You
look damn well when you're dressed.

--Thanks, Stephen said. I can't wear them if they are grey.

--He can't wear them, Buck Mulligan told his face in the mirror.
Etiquette is etiquette. He kills his mother but he can't wear grey
trousers.

He folded his razor neatly and with stroking palps of fingers felt the
smooth skin.

Stephen turned his gaze from the sea and to the plump face with its
smokeblue mobile eyes.

--That fellow I was with in the Ship last night, said Buck Mulligan,
says you have g.p.i. He's up in Dottyville with Connolly Norman. General
paralysis of the insane!

He swept the mirror a half circle in the air to flash the tidings abroad
in sunlight now radiant on the sea. His curling shaven lips laughed and
the edges of his white glittering teeth. Laughter seized all his strong
wellknit trunk.

--Look at yourself, he said, you dreadful bard!

Stephen bent forward and peered at the mirror held out to him, cleft by
a crooked crack. Hair on end. As he and others see me. Who chose this
face for me? This dogsbody to rid of vermin. It asks me too.

--I pinched it out of the skivvy's room, Buck Mulligan said. It does her
all right. The aunt always keeps plainlooking servants for Malachi. Lead
him not into temptation. And her name is Ursula.

Laughing again, he brought the mirror away from Stephen's peering eyes.

--The rage of Caliban at not seeing his face in a mirror, he said. If
Wilde were only alive to see you!

Drawing back and pointing, Stephen said with bitterness:

--It is a symbol of Irish art. The cracked looking-glass of a servant.

Buck Mulligan suddenly linked his arm in Stephen's and walked with him
round the tower, his razor and mirror clacking in the pocket where he
had thrust them.

--It's not fair to tease you like that, Kinch, is it? he said kindly.
God knows you have more spirit than any of them.

Parried again. He fears the lancet of my art as I fear that of his. The
cold steelpen.

--Cracked lookingglass of a servant! Tell that to the oxy chap
downstairs and touch him for a guinea. He's stinking with money and
thinks you're not a gentleman. His old fellow made his tin by selling
jalap to Zulus or some bloody swindle or other. God, Kinch, if you and I
could only work together we might do something for the island. Hellenise
it.

Cranly's arm. His arm.

--And to think of your having to beg from these swine. I'm the only one
that knows what you are. Why don't you trust me more? What have you
up your nose against me? Is it Haines? If he makes any noise here I'll
bring down Seymour and we'll give him a ragging worse than they gave
Clive Kempthorpe.

Young shouts of moneyed voices in Clive Kempthorpe's rooms. Palefaces:
they hold their ribs with laughter, one clasping another. O, I shall
expire! Break the news to her gently, Aubrey! I shall die! With slit
ribbons of his shirt whipping the air he hops and hobbles round the
table, with trousers down at heels, chased by Ades of Magdalen with the
tailor's shears. A scared calf's face gilded with marmalade. I don't
want to be debagged! Don't you play the giddy ox with me!

Shouts from the open window startling evening in the quadrangle. A deaf
gardener, aproned, masked with Matthew Arnold's face, pushes his mower
on the sombre lawn watching narrowly the dancing motes of grasshalms.

To ourselves... new paganism... omphalos.

--Let him stay, Stephen said. There's nothing wrong with him except at
night.

--Then what is it? Buck Mulligan asked impatiently. Cough it up. I'm
quite frank with you. What have you against me now?

They halted, looking towards the blunt cape of Bray Head that lay on the
water like the snout of a sleeping whale. Stephen freed his arm quietly.

--Do you wish me to tell you? he asked.

--Yes, what is it? Buck Mulligan answered. I don't remember anything.

He looked in Stephen's face as he spoke. A light wind passed his brow,
fanning softly his fair uncombed hair and stirring silver points of
anxiety in his eyes.

Stephen, depressed by his own voice, said:

--Do you remember the first day I went to your house after my mother's
death?

Buck Mulligan frowned quickly and said:

--What? Where? I can't remember anything. I remember only ideas and
sensations. Why? What happened in the name of God?

--You were making tea, Stephen said, and went across the landing to
get more hot water. Your mother and some visitor came out of the
drawingroom. She asked you who was in your room.

--Yes? Buck Mulligan said. What did I say? I forget.

--You said, Stephen answered, _O, it's only Dedalus whose mother is
beastly dead._

A flush which made him seem younger and more engaging rose to Buck
Mulligan's cheek.

--Did I say that? he asked. Well? What harm is that?

He shook his constraint from him nervously.

--And what is death, he asked, your mother's or yours or my own? You
saw only your mother die. I see them pop off every day in the Mater and
Richmond and cut up into tripes in the dissectingroom. It's a beastly
thing and nothing else. It simply doesn't matter. You wouldn't kneel
down to pray for your mother on her deathbed when she asked you. Why?
Because you have the cursed jesuit strain in you, only it's injected the
wrong way. To me it's all a mockery and beastly. Her cerebral lobes
are not functioning. She calls the doctor sir Peter Teazle and picks
buttercups off the quilt. Humour her till it's over. You crossed her
last wish in death and yet you sulk with me because I don't whinge like
some hired mute from Lalouette's. Absurd! I suppose I did say it. I
didn't mean to offend the memory of your mother.

He had spoken himself into boldness. Stephen, shielding the gaping
wounds which the words had left in his heart, said very coldly:

--I am not thinking of the offence to my mother.

--Of what then? Buck Mulligan asked.

--Of the offence to me, Stephen answered.

Buck Mulligan swung round on his heel.

--O, an impossible person! he exclaimed.

He walked off quickly round the parapet. Stephen stood at his post,
gazing over the calm sea towards the headland. Sea and headland now grew
dim. Pulses were beating in his eyes, veiling their sight, and he felt
the fever of his cheeks.

A voice within the tower called loudly:

--Are you up there, Mulligan?

--I'm coming, Buck Mulligan answered.

He turned towards Stephen and said:

--Look at the sea. What does it care about offences? Chuck Loyola,
Kinch, and come on down. The Sassenach wants his morning rashers.

His head halted again for a moment at the top of the staircase, level
with the roof:

--Don't mope over it all day, he said. I'm inconsequent. Give up the
moody brooding.

His head vanished but the drone of his descending voice boomed out of
the stairhead:

     _And no more turn aside and brood
     Upon love's bitter mystery
     For Fergus rules the brazen cars._


Woodshadows floated silently by through the morning peace from the
stairhead seaward where he gazed. Inshore and farther out the mirror of
water whitened, spurned by lightshod hurrying feet. White breast of
the dim sea. The twining stresses, two by two. A hand plucking the
harpstrings, merging their twining chords. Wavewhite wedded words
shimmering on the dim tide.

A cloud began to cover the sun slowly, wholly, shadowing the bay in
deeper green. It lay beneath him, a bowl of bitter waters. Fergus' song:
I sang it alone in the house, holding down the long dark chords. Her
door was open: she wanted to hear my music. Silent with awe and pity
I went to her bedside. She was crying in her wretched bed. For those
words, Stephen: love's bitter mystery.

Where now?

Her secrets: old featherfans, tasselled dancecards, powdered with musk,
a gaud of amber beads in her locked drawer. A birdcage hung in the sunny
window of her house when she was a girl. She heard old Royce sing in the
pantomime of Turko the Terrible and laughed with others when he sang:

     _I am the boy
     That can enjoy
     Invisibility._


Phantasmal mirth, folded away: muskperfumed.

_And no more turn aside and brood._


Folded away in the memory of nature with her toys. Memories beset his
brooding brain. Her glass of water from the kitchen tap when she had
approached the sacrament. A cored apple, filled with brown sugar,
roasting for her at the hob on a dark autumn evening. Her shapely
fingernails reddened by the blood of squashed lice from the children's
shirts.

In a dream, silently, she had come to him, her wasted body within its
loose graveclothes giving off an odour of wax and rosewood, her breath,
bent over him with mute secret words, a faint odour of wetted ashes.

Her glazing eyes, staring out of death, to shake and bend my soul. On me
alone. The ghostcandle to light her agony. Ghostly light on the tortured
face. Her hoarse loud breath rattling in horror, while all prayed on
their knees. Her eyes on me to strike me down. _Liliata rutilantium te
confessorum turma circumdet: iubilantium te virginum chorus excipiat._

Ghoul! Chewer of corpses!

No, mother! Let me be and let me live.

--Kinch ahoy!

Buck Mulligan's voice sang from within the tower. It came nearer up the
staircase, calling again. Stephen, still trembling at his soul's cry,
heard warm running sunlight and in the air behind him friendly words.

--Dedalus, come down, like a good mosey. Breakfast is ready. Haines is
apologising for waking us last night. It's all right.

--I'm coming, Stephen said, turning.

--Do, for Jesus' sake, Buck Mulligan said. For my sake and for all our
sakes.

His head disappeared and reappeared.

--I told him your symbol of Irish art. He says it's very clever. Touch
him for a quid, will you? A guinea, I mean.

--I get paid this morning, Stephen said.

--The school kip? Buck Mulligan said. How much? Four quid? Lend us one.

--If you want it, Stephen said.

--Four shining sovereigns, Buck Mulligan cried with delight. We'll
have a glorious drunk to astonish the druidy druids. Four omnipotent
sovereigns.

He flung up his hands and tramped down the stone stairs, singing out of
tune with a Cockney accent:

     _O, won't we have a merry time,
     Drinking whisky, beer and wine!
     On coronation,
     Coronation day!
     O, won't we have a merry time
     On coronation day!_


Warm sunshine merrying over the sea. The nickel shavingbowl shone,
forgotten, on the parapet. Why should I bring it down? Or leave it there
all day, forgotten friendship?

He went over to it, held it in his hands awhile, feeling its coolness,
smelling the clammy slaver of the lather in which the brush was stuck.
So I carried the boat of incense then at Clongowes. I am another now and
yet the same. A servant too. A server of a servant.

In the gloomy domed livingroom of the tower Buck Mulligan's gowned form
moved briskly to and fro about the hearth, hiding and revealing its
yellow glow. Two shafts of soft daylight fell across the flagged floor
from the high barbacans: and at the meeting of their rays a cloud of
coalsmoke and fumes of fried grease floated, turning.

--We'll be choked, Buck Mulligan said. Haines, open that door, will you?

Stephen laid the shavingbowl on the locker. A tall figure rose from the
hammock where it had been sitting, went to the doorway and pulled open
the inner doors.

--Have you the key? a voice asked.

--Dedalus has it, Buck Mulligan said. Janey Mack, I'm choked!

He howled, without looking up from the fire:

--Kinch!

--It's in the lock, Stephen said, coming forward.

The key scraped round harshly twice and, when the heavy door had been
set ajar, welcome light and bright air entered. Haines stood at the
doorway, looking out. Stephen haled his upended valise to the table and
sat down to wait. Buck Mulligan tossed the fry on to the dish beside
him. Then he carried the dish and a large teapot over to the table, set
them down heavily and sighed with relief.

--I'm melting, he said, as the candle remarked when... But, hush! Not a
word more on that subject! Kinch, wake up! Bread, butter, honey. Haines,
come in. The grub is ready. Bless us, O Lord, and these thy gifts.
Where's the sugar? O, jay, there's no milk.

Stephen fetched the loaf and the pot of honey and the buttercooler from
the locker. Buck Mulligan sat down in a sudden pet.

--What sort of a kip is this? he said. I told her to come after eight.

--We can drink it black, Stephen said thirstily. There's a lemon in the
locker.

--O, damn you and your Paris fads! Buck Mulligan said. I want Sandycove
milk.

Haines came in from the doorway and said quietly:

--That woman is coming up with the milk.

--The blessings of God on you! Buck Mulligan cried, jumping up from his
chair. Sit down. Pour out the tea there. The sugar is in the bag. Here,
I can't go fumbling at the damned eggs.

He hacked through the fry on the dish and slapped it out on three
plates, saying:

--_In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti._

Haines sat down to pour out the tea.

--I'm giving you two lumps each, he said. But, I say, Mulligan, you do
make strong tea, don't you?

Buck Mulligan, hewing thick slices from the loaf, said in an old woman's
wheedling voice:

--When I makes tea I makes tea, as old mother Grogan said. And when I
makes water I makes water.

--By Jove, it is tea, Haines said.

Buck Mulligan went on hewing and wheedling:

--_So I do, Mrs Cahill,_ says she. _Begob, ma'am,_ says Mrs Cahill, _God
send you don't make them in the one pot._

He lunged towards his messmates in turn a thick slice of bread, impaled
on his knife.

--That's folk, he said very earnestly, for your book, Haines. Five
lines of text and ten pages of notes about the folk and the fishgods of
Dundrum. Printed by the weird sisters in the year of the big wind.

He turned to Stephen and asked in a fine puzzled voice, lifting his
brows:

--Can you recall, brother, is mother Grogan's tea and water pot spoken
of in the Mabinogion or is it in the Upanishads?

--I doubt it, said Stephen gravely.

--Do you now? Buck Mulligan said in the same tone. Your reasons, pray?

--I fancy, Stephen said as he ate, it did not exist in or out of the
Mabinogion. Mother Grogan was, one imagines, a kinswoman of Mary Ann.

Buck Mulligan's face smiled with delight.

--Charming! he said in a finical sweet voice, showing his white teeth
and blinking his eyes pleasantly. Do you think she was? Quite charming!

Then, suddenly overclouding all his features, he growled in a hoarsened
rasping voice as he hewed again vigorously at the loaf:

     _--For old Mary Ann
     She doesn't care a damn.
     But, hising up her petticoats..._


He crammed his mouth with fry and munched and droned.

The doorway was darkened by an entering form.

--The milk, sir!

--Come in, ma'am, Mulligan said. Kinch, get the jug.

An old woman came forward and stood by Stephen's elbow.

--That's a lovely morning, sir, she said. Glory be to God.

--To whom? Mulligan said, glancing at her. Ah, to be sure!

Stephen reached back and took the milkjug from the locker.

--The islanders, Mulligan said to Haines casually, speak frequently of
the collector of prepuces.

--How much, sir? asked the old woman.

--A quart, Stephen said.

He watched her pour into the measure and thence into the jug rich white
milk, not hers. Old shrunken paps. She poured again a measureful and
a tilly. Old and secret she had entered from a morning world, maybe
a messenger. She praised the goodness of the milk, pouring it out.
Crouching by a patient cow at daybreak in the lush field, a witch on her
toadstool, her wrinkled fingers quick at the squirting dugs. They lowed
about her whom they knew, dewsilky cattle. Silk of the kine and poor old
woman, names given her in old times. A wandering crone, lowly form of
an immortal serving her conqueror and her gay betrayer, their common
cuckquean, a messenger from the secret morning. To serve or to upbraid,
whether he could not tell: but scorned to beg her favour.

--It is indeed, ma'am, Buck Mulligan said, pouring milk into their cups.

--Taste it, sir, she said.

He drank at her bidding.

--If we could live on good food like that, he said to her somewhat
loudly, we wouldn't have the country full of rotten teeth and rotten
guts. Living in a bogswamp, eating cheap food and the streets paved with
dust, horsedung and consumptives' spits.

--Are you a medical student, sir? the old woman asked.

--I am, ma'am, Buck Mulligan answered.

--Look at that now, she said.

Stephen listened in scornful silence. She bows her old head to a voice
that speaks to her loudly, her bonesetter, her medicineman: me she
slights. To the voice that will shrive and oil for the grave all there
is of her but her woman's unclean loins, of man's flesh made not in
God's likeness, the serpent's prey. And to the loud voice that now bids
her be silent with wondering unsteady eyes.

--Do you understand what he says? Stephen asked her.

--Is it French you are talking, sir? the old woman said to Haines.

Haines spoke to her again a longer speech, confidently.

--Irish, Buck Mulligan said. Is there Gaelic on you?

--I thought it was Irish, she said, by the sound of it. Are you from the
west, sir?

--I am an Englishman, Haines answered.

--He's English, Buck Mulligan said, and he thinks we ought to speak
Irish in Ireland.

--Sure we ought to, the old woman said, and I'm ashamed I don't speak
the language myself. I'm told it's a grand language by them that knows.

--Grand is no name for it, said Buck Mulligan. Wonderful entirely. Fill
us out some more tea, Kinch. Would you like a cup, ma'am?

--No, thank you, sir, the old woman said, slipping the ring of the
milkcan on her forearm and about to go.

Haines said to her:

--Have you your bill? We had better pay her, Mulligan, hadn't we?

Stephen filled again the three cups.

--Bill, sir? she said, halting. Well, it's seven mornings a pint at
twopence is seven twos is a shilling and twopence over and these three
mornings a quart at fourpence is three quarts is a shilling. That's a
shilling and one and two is two and two, sir.

Buck Mulligan sighed and, having filled his mouth with a crust thickly
buttered on both sides, stretched forth his legs and began to search his
trouser pockets.

--Pay up and look pleasant, Haines said to him, smiling.

Stephen filled a third cup, a spoonful of tea colouring faintly the
thick rich milk. Buck Mulligan brought up a florin, twisted it round in
his fingers and cried:

--A miracle!

He passed it along the table towards the old woman, saying:

--Ask nothing more of me, sweet. All I can give you I give.

Stephen laid the coin in her uneager hand.

--We'll owe twopence, he said.

--Time enough, sir, she said, taking the coin. Time enough. Good
morning, sir.

She curtseyed and went out, followed by Buck Mulligan's tender chant:

     _--Heart of my heart, were it more,
     More would be laid at your feet._


He turned to Stephen and said:

--Seriously, Dedalus. I'm stony. Hurry out to your school kip and bring
us back some money. Today the bards must drink and junket. Ireland
expects that every man this day will do his duty.

--That reminds me, Haines said, rising, that I have to visit your
national library today.

--Our swim first, Buck Mulligan said.

He turned to Stephen and asked blandly:

--Is this the day for your monthly wash, Kinch?

Then he said to Haines:

--The unclean bard makes a point of washing once a month.

--All Ireland is washed by the gulfstream, Stephen said as he let honey
trickle over a slice of the loaf.

Haines from the corner where he was knotting easily a scarf about the
loose collar of his tennis shirt spoke:

--I intend to make a collection of your sayings if you will let me.

Speaking to me. They wash and tub and scrub. Agenbite of inwit.
Conscience. Yet here's a spot.

--That one about the cracked lookingglass of a servant being the symbol
of Irish art is deuced good.

Buck Mulligan kicked Stephen's foot under the table and said with warmth
of tone:

--Wait till you hear him on Hamlet, Haines.

--Well, I mean it, Haines said, still speaking to Stephen. I was just
thinking of it when that poor old creature came in.

--Would I make any money by it? Stephen asked.

Haines laughed and, as he took his soft grey hat from the holdfast of
the hammock, said:

--I don't know, I'm sure.

He strolled out to the doorway. Buck Mulligan bent across to Stephen and
said with coarse vigour:

--You put your hoof in it now. What did you say that for?

--Well? Stephen said. The problem is to get money. From whom? From the
milkwoman or from him. It's a toss up, I think.

--I blow him out about you, Buck Mulligan said, and then you come along
with your lousy leer and your gloomy jesuit jibes.

--I see little hope, Stephen said, from her or from him.

Buck Mulligan sighed tragically and laid his hand on Stephen's arm.

--From me, Kinch, he said.

In a suddenly changed tone he added:

--To tell you the God's truth I think you're right. Damn all else they
are good for. Why don't you play them as I do? To hell with them all.
Let us get out of the kip.

He stood up, gravely ungirdled and disrobed himself of his gown, saying
resignedly:

--Mulligan is stripped of his garments.

He emptied his pockets on to the table.

--There's your snotrag, he said.

And putting on his stiff collar and rebellious tie he spoke to them,
chiding them, and to his dangling watchchain. His hands plunged and
rummaged in his trunk while he called for a clean handkerchief. God,
we'll simply have to dress the character. I want puce gloves and
green boots. Contradiction. Do I contradict myself? Very well then, I
contradict myself. Mercurial Malachi. A limp black missile flew out of
his talking hands.

--And there's your Latin quarter hat, he said.

Stephen picked it up and put it on. Haines called to them from the
doorway:

--Are you coming, you fellows?

--I'm ready, Buck Mulligan answered, going towards the door. Come out,
Kinch. You have eaten all we left, I suppose. Resigned he passed out
with grave words and gait, saying, wellnigh with sorrow:

--And going forth he met Butterly.

Stephen, taking his ashplant from its leaningplace, followed them out
and, as they went down the ladder, pulled to the slow iron door and
locked it. He put the huge key in his inner pocket.

At the foot of the ladder Buck Mulligan asked:

--Did you bring the key?

--I have it, Stephen said, preceding them.

He walked on. Behind him he heard Buck Mulligan club with his heavy
bathtowel the leader shoots of ferns or grasses.

--Down, sir! How dare you, sir!

Haines asked:

--Do you pay rent for this tower?

--Twelve quid, Buck Mulligan said.

--To the secretary of state for war, Stephen added over his shoulder.

They halted while Haines surveyed the tower and said at last:

--Rather bleak in wintertime, I should say. Martello you call it?

--Billy Pitt had them built, Buck Mulligan said, when the French were on
the sea. But ours is the _omphalos_.

--What is your idea of Hamlet? Haines asked Stephen.

--No, no, Buck Mulligan shouted in pain. I'm not equal to Thomas Aquinas
and the fiftyfive reasons he has made out to prop it up. Wait till I
have a few pints in me first.

He turned to Stephen, saying, as he pulled down neatly the peaks of his
primrose waistcoat:

--You couldn't manage it under three pints, Kinch, could you?

--It has waited so long, Stephen said listlessly, it can wait longer.

--You pique my curiosity, Haines said amiably. Is it some paradox?

--Pooh! Buck Mulligan said. We have grown out of Wilde and paradoxes.
It's quite simple. He proves by algebra that Hamlet's grandson is
Shakespeare's grandfather and that he himself is the ghost of his own
father.

--What? Haines said, beginning to point at Stephen. He himself?

Buck Mulligan slung his towel stolewise round his neck and, bending in
loose laughter, said to Stephen's ear:

--O, shade of Kinch the elder! Japhet in search of a father!

--We're always tired in the morning, Stephen said to Haines. And it is
rather long to tell.

Buck Mulligan, walking forward again, raised his hands.

--The sacred pint alone can unbind the tongue of Dedalus, he said.

--I mean to say, Haines explained to Stephen as they followed, this
tower and these cliffs here remind me somehow of Elsinore. _That beetles
o'er his base into the sea,_ isn't it?

Buck Mulligan turned suddenly for an instant towards Stephen but did
not speak. In the bright silent instant Stephen saw his own image in
cheap dusty mourning between their gay attires.

--It's a wonderful tale, Haines said, bringing them to halt again.

Eyes, pale as the sea the wind had freshened, paler, firm and prudent.
The seas' ruler, he gazed southward over the bay, empty save for the
smokeplume of the mailboat vague on the bright skyline and a sail
tacking by the Muglins.

--I read a theological interpretation of it somewhere, he said bemused.
The Father and the Son idea. The Son striving to be atoned with the
Father.

Buck Mulligan at once put on a blithe broadly smiling face. He looked
at them, his wellshaped mouth open happily, his eyes, from which he had
suddenly withdrawn all shrewd sense, blinking with mad gaiety. He moved
a doll's head to and fro, the brims of his Panama hat quivering, and
began to chant in a quiet happy foolish voice:

     _--I'm the queerest young fellow that ever you heard.
     My mother's a jew, my father's a bird.
     With Joseph the joiner I cannot agree.
     So here's to disciples and Calvary._


He held up a forefinger of warning.

     _--If anyone thinks that I amn't divine
     He'll get no free drinks when I'm making the wine
     But have to drink water and wish it were plain
     That i make when the wine becomes water again._


He tugged swiftly at Stephen's ashplant in farewell and, running forward
to a brow of the cliff, fluttered his hands at his sides like fins or
wings of one about to rise in the air, and chanted:

     _--Goodbye, now, goodbye! Write down all I said
     And tell Tom, Dick and Harry I rose from the dead.
     What's bred in the bone cannot fail me to fly
     And Olivet's breezy... Goodbye, now, goodbye!_


He capered before them down towards the fortyfoot hole, fluttering his
winglike hands, leaping nimbly, Mercury's hat quivering in the fresh
wind that bore back to them his brief birdsweet cries.

Haines, who had been laughing guardedly, walked on beside Stephen and
said:

--We oughtn't to laugh, I suppose. He's rather blasphemous. I'm not a
believer myself, that is to say. Still his gaiety takes the harm out of
it somehow, doesn't it? What did he call it? Joseph the Joiner?

--The ballad of joking Jesus, Stephen answered.

--O, Haines said, you have heard it before?

--Three times a day, after meals, Stephen said drily.

--You're not a believer, are you? Haines asked. I mean, a believer in
the narrow sense of the word. Creation from nothing and miracles and a
personal God.

--There's only one sense of the word, it seems to me, Stephen said.

Haines stopped to take out a smooth silver case in which twinkled a
green stone. He sprang it open with his thumb and offered it.

--Thank you, Stephen said, taking a cigarette.

Haines helped himself and snapped the case to. He put it back in his
sidepocket and took from his waistcoatpocket a nickel tinderbox, sprang
it open too, and, having lit his cigarette, held the flaming spunk
towards Stephen in the shell of his hands.

--Yes, of course, he said, as they went on again. Either you believe
or you don't, isn't it? Personally I couldn't stomach that idea of a
personal God. You don't stand for that, I suppose?

--You behold in me, Stephen said with grim displeasure, a horrible
example of free thought.

He walked on, waiting to be spoken to, trailing his ashplant by his
side. Its ferrule followed lightly on the path, squealing at his heels.
My familiar, after me, calling, Steeeeeeeeeeeephen! A wavering line
along the path. They will walk on it tonight, coming here in the dark.
He wants that key. It is mine. I paid the rent. Now I eat his salt
bread. Give him the key too. All. He will ask for it. That was in his
eyes.

--After all, Haines began...

Stephen turned and saw that the cold gaze which had measured him was not
all unkind.

--After all, I should think you are able to free yourself. You are your
own master, it seems to me.

--I am a servant of two masters, Stephen said, an English and an
Italian.

--Italian? Haines said.

A crazy queen, old and jealous. Kneel down before me.

--And a third, Stephen said, there is who wants me for odd jobs.

--Italian? Haines said again. What do you mean?

--The imperial British state, Stephen answered, his colour rising, and
the holy Roman catholic and apostolic church.

Haines detached from his underlip some fibres of tobacco before he
spoke.

--I can quite understand that, he said calmly. An Irishman must think
like that, I daresay. We feel in England that we have treated you rather
unfairly. It seems history is to blame.

The proud potent titles clanged over Stephen's memory the triumph
of their brazen bells: _et unam sanctam catholicam et apostolicam
ecclesiam:_ the slow growth and change of rite and dogma like his own
rare thoughts, a chemistry of stars. Symbol of the apostles in the
mass for pope Marcellus, the voices blended, singing alone loud in
affirmation: and behind their chant the vigilant angel of the church
militant disarmed and menaced her heresiarchs. A horde of heresies
fleeing with mitres awry: Photius and the brood of mockers of
whom Mulligan was one, and Arius, warring his life long upon the
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and Valentine, spurning
Christ's terrene body, and the subtle African heresiarch Sabellius who
held that the Father was Himself His own Son. Words Mulligan had spoken
a moment since in mockery to the stranger. Idle mockery. The void
awaits surely all them that weave the wind: a menace, a disarming and a
worsting from those embattled angels of the church, Michael's host,
who defend her ever in the hour of conflict with their lances and their
shields.

Hear, hear! Prolonged applause. _Zut! Nom de Dieu!_

--Of course I'm a Britisher, Haines's voice said, and I feel as one. I
don't want to see my country fall into the hands of German jews either.
That's our national problem, I'm afraid, just now.

Two men stood at the verge of the cliff, watching: businessman, boatman.

--She's making for Bullock harbour.

The boatman nodded towards the north of the bay with some disdain.

--There's five fathoms out there, he said. It'll be swept up that way
when the tide comes in about one. It's nine days today.

The man that was drowned. A sail veering about the blank bay waiting
for a swollen bundle to bob up, roll over to the sun a puffy face,
saltwhite. Here I am.

They followed the winding path down to the creek. Buck Mulligan stood on
a stone, in shirtsleeves, his unclipped tie rippling over his shoulder.
A young man clinging to a spur of rock near him, moved slowly frogwise
his green legs in the deep jelly of the water.

--Is the brother with you, Malachi?

--Down in Westmeath. With the Bannons.

--Still there? I got a card from Bannon. Says he found a sweet young
thing down there. Photo girl he calls her.

--Snapshot, eh? Brief exposure.

Buck Mulligan sat down to unlace his boots. An elderly man shot up near
the spur of rock a blowing red face. He scrambled up by the stones,
water glistening on his pate and on its garland of grey hair, water
rilling over his chest and paunch and spilling jets out of his black
sagging loincloth.

Buck Mulligan made way for him to scramble past and, glancing at Haines
and Stephen, crossed himself piously with his thumbnail at brow and lips
and breastbone.

--Seymour's back in town, the young man said, grasping again his spur of
rock. Chucked medicine and going in for the army.

--Ah, go to God! Buck Mulligan said.

--Going over next week to stew. You know that red Carlisle girl, Lily?

--Yes.

--Spooning with him last night on the pier. The father is rotto with
money.

--Is she up the pole?

--Better ask Seymour that.

--Seymour a bleeding officer! Buck Mulligan said.

He nodded to himself as he drew off his trousers and stood up, saying
tritely:

--Redheaded women buck like goats.

He broke off in alarm, feeling his side under his flapping shirt.

--My twelfth rib is gone, he cried. I'm the _Uebermensch._ Toothless
Kinch and I, the supermen.

He struggled out of his shirt and flung it behind him to where his
clothes lay.

--Are you going in here, Malachi?

--Yes. Make room in the bed.

The young man shoved himself backward through the water and reached
the middle of the creek in two long clean strokes. Haines sat down on a
stone, smoking.

--Are you not coming in? Buck Mulligan asked.

--Later on, Haines said. Not on my breakfast.

Stephen turned away.

--I'm going, Mulligan, he said.

--Give us that key, Kinch, Buck Mulligan said, to keep my chemise flat.

Stephen handed him the key. Buck Mulligan laid it across his heaped
clothes.

--And twopence, he said, for a pint. Throw it there.

Stephen threw two pennies on the soft heap. Dressing, undressing. Buck
Mulligan erect, with joined hands before him, said solemnly:

--He who stealeth from the poor lendeth to the Lord. Thus spake
Zarathustra.

His plump body plunged.

--We'll see you again, Haines said, turning as Stephen walked up the
path and smiling at wild Irish.

Horn of a bull, hoof of a horse, smile of a Saxon.

--The Ship, Buck Mulligan cried. Half twelve.

--Good, Stephen said.

He walked along the upwardcurving path.

     _Liliata rutilantium.
     Turma circumdet.
     Iubilantium te virginum._


The priest's grey nimbus in a niche where he dressed discreetly. I will
not sleep here tonight. Home also I cannot go.

A voice, sweettoned and sustained, called to him from the sea. Turning
the curve he waved his hand. It called again. A sleek brown head, a
seal's, far out on the water, round.

Usurper.



--You, Cochrane, what city sent for him?

--Tarentum, sir.

--Very good. Well?

--There was a battle, sir.

--Very good. Where?

The boy's blank face asked the blank window.

Fabled by the daughters of memory. And yet it was in some way if not as
memory fabled it. A phrase, then, of impatience, thud of Blake's wings
of excess. I hear the ruin of all space, shattered glass and toppling
masonry, and time one livid final flame. What's left us then?

--I forget the place, sir. 279 B. C.

--Asculum, Stephen said, glancing at the name and date in the
gorescarred book.

--Yes, sir. And he said: _Another victory like that and we are done
for._

That phrase the world had remembered. A dull ease of the mind. From
a hill above a corpsestrewn plain a general speaking to his officers,
leaned upon his spear. Any general to any officers. They lend ear.

--You, Armstrong, Stephen said. What was the end of Pyrrhus?

--End of Pyrrhus, sir?

--I know, sir. Ask me, sir, Comyn said.

--Wait. You, Armstrong. Do you know anything about Pyrrhus?

A bag of figrolls lay snugly in Armstrong's satchel. He curled them
between his palms at whiles and swallowed them softly. Crumbs adhered to
the tissue of his lips. A sweetened boy's breath. Welloff people, proud
that their eldest son was in the navy. Vico road, Dalkey.

--Pyrrhus, sir? Pyrrhus, a pier.

All laughed. Mirthless high malicious laughter. Armstrong looked round
at his classmates, silly glee in profile. In a moment they will laugh
more loudly, aware of my lack of rule and of the fees their papas pay.

--Tell me now, Stephen said, poking the boy's shoulder with the book,
what is a pier.

--A pier, sir, Armstrong said. A thing out in the water. A kind of a
bridge. Kingstown pier, sir.

Some laughed again: mirthless but with meaning. Two in the back bench
whispered. Yes. They knew: had never learned nor ever been innocent.
All. With envy he watched their faces: Edith, Ethel, Gerty, Lily. Their
likes: their breaths, too, sweetened with tea and jam, their bracelets
tittering in the struggle.

--Kingstown pier, Stephen said. Yes, a disappointed bridge.

The words troubled their gaze.

--How, sir? Comyn asked. A bridge is across a river.

For Haines's chapbook. No-one here to hear. Tonight deftly amid wild
drink and talk, to pierce the polished mail of his mind. What then? A
jester at the court of his master, indulged and disesteemed, winning a
clement master's praise. Why had they chosen all that part? Not wholly
for the smooth caress. For them too history was a tale like any other
too often heard, their land a pawnshop.

Had Pyrrhus not fallen by a beldam's hand in Argos or Julius Caesar not
been knifed to death. They are not to be thought away. Time has
branded them and fettered they are lodged in the room of the infinite
possibilities they have ousted. But can those have been possible seeing
that they never were? Or was that only possible which came to pass?
Weave, weaver of the wind.

--Tell us a story, sir.

--O, do, sir. A ghoststory.

--Where do you begin in this? Stephen asked, opening another book.

-_-Weep no more,_ Comyn said.

--Go on then, Talbot.

--And the story, sir?

--After, Stephen said. Go on, Talbot.

A swarthy boy opened a book and propped it nimbly under the breastwork
of his satchel. He recited jerks of verse with odd glances at the text:

     _--Weep no more, woful shepherds, weep no more
     For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead,
     Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor..._


It must be a movement then, an actuality of the possible as possible.
Aristotle's phrase formed itself within the gabbled verses and floated
out into the studious silence of the library of Saint Genevieve where he
had read, sheltered from the sin of Paris, night by night. By his elbow
a delicate Siamese conned a handbook of strategy. Fed and feeding brains
about me: under glowlamps, impaled, with faintly beating feelers: and
in my mind's darkness a sloth of the underworld, reluctant, shy of
brightness, shifting her dragon scaly folds. Thought is the thought of
thought. Tranquil brightness. The soul is in a manner all that is: the
soul is the form of forms. Tranquility sudden, vast, candescent: form of
forms.

Talbot repeated:

     _--Through the dear might of Him that walked the waves,
     Through the dear might..._


--Turn over, Stephen said quietly. I don't see anything.

--What, sir? Talbot asked simply, bending forward.

His hand turned the page over. He leaned back and went on again, having
just remembered. Of him that walked the waves. Here also over these
craven hearts his shadow lies and on the scoffer's heart and lips and
on mine. It lies upon their eager faces who offered him a coin of the
tribute. To Caesar what is Caesar's, to God what is God's. A long
look from dark eyes, a riddling sentence to be woven and woven on the
church's looms. Ay.

     _Riddle me, riddle me, randy ro.
     My father gave me seeds to sow._


Talbot slid his closed book into his satchel.

--Have I heard all? Stephen asked.

--Yes, sir. Hockey at ten, sir.

--Half day, sir. Thursday.

--Who can answer a riddle? Stephen asked.

They bundled their books away, pencils clacking, pages rustling.
Crowding together they strapped and buckled their satchels, all gabbling
gaily:

--A riddle, sir? Ask me, sir.

--O, ask me, sir.

--A hard one, sir.

--This is the riddle, Stephen said:

     _The cock crew,
     The sky was blue:
     The bells in heaven
     Were striking eleven.
     'Tis time for this poor soul
     To go to heaven._


What is that?

--What, sir?

--Again, sir. We didn't hear.

Their eyes grew bigger as the lines were repeated. After a silence
Cochrane said:

--What is it, sir? We give it up.

Stephen, his throat itching, answered:

--The fox burying his grandmother under a hollybush.

He stood up and gave a shout of nervous laughter to which their cries
echoed dismay.

A stick struck the door and a voice in the corridor called:

--Hockey!

They broke asunder, sidling out of their benches, leaping them. Quickly
they were gone and from the lumberroom came the rattle of sticks and
clamour of their boots and tongues.

Sargent who alone had lingered came forward slowly, showing an open
copybook. His thick hair and scraggy neck gave witness of unreadiness
and through his misty glasses weak eyes looked up pleading. On his
cheek, dull and bloodless, a soft stain of ink lay, dateshaped, recent
and damp as a snail's bed.

He held out his copybook. The word _Sums_ was written on the headline.
Beneath were sloping figures and at the foot a crooked signature with
blind loops and a blot. Cyril Sargent: his name and seal.

--Mr Deasy told me to write them out all again, he said, and show them
to you, sir.

Stephen touched the edges of the book. Futility.

--Do you understand how to do them now? he asked.

--Numbers eleven to fifteen, Sargent answered. Mr Deasy said I was to
copy them off the board, sir.

--Can you do them yourself? Stephen asked.

--No, sir.

Ugly and futile: lean neck and thick hair and a stain of ink, a snail's
bed. Yet someone had loved him, borne him in her arms and in her heart.
But for her the race of the world would have trampled him underfoot,
a squashed boneless snail. She had loved his weak watery blood drained
from her own. Was that then real? The only true thing in life? His
mother's prostrate body the fiery Columbanus in holy zeal bestrode.
She was no more: the trembling skeleton of a twig burnt in the fire,
an odour of rosewood and wetted ashes. She had saved him from being
trampled underfoot and had gone, scarcely having been. A poor soul
gone to heaven: and on a heath beneath winking stars a fox, red reek
of rapine in his fur, with merciless bright eyes scraped in the earth,
listened, scraped up the earth, listened, scraped and scraped.

Sitting at his side Stephen solved out the problem. He proves by algebra
that Shakespeare's ghost is Hamlet's grandfather. Sargent peered askance
through his slanted glasses. Hockeysticks rattled in the lumberroom: the
hollow knock of a ball and calls from the field.

Across the page the symbols moved in grave morrice, in the mummery of
their letters, wearing quaint caps of squares and cubes. Give hands,
traverse, bow to partner: so: imps of fancy of the Moors. Gone too from
the world, Averroes and Moses Maimonides, dark men in mien and movement,
flashing in their mocking mirrors the obscure soul of the world, a
darkness shining in brightness which brightness could not comprehend.

--Do you understand now? Can you work the second for yourself?

--Yes, sir.

In long shaky strokes Sargent copied the data. Waiting always for a word
of help his hand moved faithfully the unsteady symbols, a faint hue of
shame flickering behind his dull skin. _Amor matris:_ subjective and
objective genitive. With her weak blood and wheysour milk she had fed
him and hid from sight of others his swaddling bands.

Like him was I, these sloping shoulders, this gracelessness. My
childhood bends beside me. Too far for me to lay a hand there once or
lightly. Mine is far and his secret as our eyes. Secrets, silent, stony
sit in the dark palaces of both our hearts: secrets weary of their
tyranny: tyrants, willing to be dethroned.

The sum was done.

--It is very simple, Stephen said as he stood up.

--Yes, sir. Thanks, Sargent answered.

He dried the page with a sheet of thin blottingpaper and carried his
copybook back to his bench.

--You had better get your stick and go out to the others, Stephen said
as he followed towards the door the boy's graceless form.

--Yes, sir.

In the corridor his name was heard, called from the playfield.

--Sargent!

--Run on, Stephen said. Mr Deasy is calling you.

He stood in the porch and watched the laggard hurry towards the scrappy
field where sharp voices were in strife. They were sorted in teams and
Mr Deasy came away stepping over wisps of grass with gaitered feet. When
he had reached the schoolhouse voices again contending called to him. He
turned his angry white moustache.

--What is it now? he cried continually without listening.

--Cochrane and Halliday are on the same side, sir, Stephen said.

--Will you wait in my study for a moment, Mr Deasy said, till I restore
order here.

And as he stepped fussily back across the field his old man's voice
cried sternly:

--What is the matter? What is it now?

Their sharp voices cried about him on all sides: their many forms closed
round him, the garish sunshine bleaching the honey of his illdyed head.

Stale smoky air hung in the study with the smell of drab abraded leather
of its chairs. As on the first day he bargained with me here. As it was
in the beginning, is now. On the sideboard the tray of Stuart coins,
base treasure of a bog: and ever shall be. And snug in their spooncase
of purple plush, faded, the twelve apostles having preached to all the
gentiles: world without end.

A hasty step over the stone porch and in the corridor. Blowing out his
rare moustache Mr Deasy halted at the table.

--First, our little financial settlement, he said.

He brought out of his coat a pocketbook bound by a leather thong. It
slapped open and he took from it two notes, one of joined halves, and
laid them carefully on the table.

--Two, he said, strapping and stowing his pocketbook away.

And now his strongroom for the gold. Stephen's embarrassed hand moved
over the shells heaped in the cold stone mortar: whelks and money
cowries and leopard shells: and this, whorled as an emir's turban, and
this, the scallop of saint James. An old pilgrim's hoard, dead treasure,
hollow shells.

A sovereign fell, bright and new, on the soft pile of the tablecloth.

--Three, Mr Deasy said, turning his little savingsbox about in his hand.
These are handy things to have. See. This is for sovereigns. This is for
shillings. Sixpences, halfcrowns. And here crowns. See.

He shot from it two crowns and two shillings.

--Three twelve, he said. I think you'll find that's right.

--Thank you, sir, Stephen said, gathering the money together with shy
haste and putting it all in a pocket of his trousers.

--No thanks at all, Mr Deasy said. You have earned it.

Stephen's hand, free again, went back to the hollow shells. Symbols too
of beauty and of power. A lump in my pocket: symbols soiled by greed and
misery.

--Don't carry it like that, Mr Deasy said. You'll pull it out somewhere
and lose it. You just buy one of these machines. You'll find them very
handy.

Answer something.

--Mine would be often empty, Stephen said.

The same room and hour, the same wisdom: and I the same. Three times
now. Three nooses round me here. Well? I can break them in this instant
if I will.

--Because you don't save, Mr Deasy said, pointing his finger. You don't
know yet what money is. Money is power. When you have lived as long as I
have. I know, I know. If youth but knew. But what does Shakespeare say?
_Put but money in thy purse._

--Iago, Stephen murmured.

He lifted his gaze from the idle shells to the old man's stare.

--He knew what money was, Mr Deasy said. He made money. A poet, yes, but
an Englishman too. Do you know what is the pride of the English? Do you
know what is the proudest word you will ever hear from an Englishman's
mouth?

The seas' ruler. His seacold eyes looked on the empty bay: it seems
history is to blame: on me and on my words, unhating.

--That on his empire, Stephen said, the sun never sets.

--Ba! Mr Deasy cried. That's not English. A French Celt said that. He
tapped his savingsbox against his thumbnail.

--I will tell you, he said solemnly, what is his proudest boast. _I paid
my way._

Good man, good man.

_--I paid my way. I never borrowed a shilling in my life._ Can you feel
that? _I owe nothing._ Can you?

Mulligan, nine pounds, three pairs of socks, one pair brogues, ties.
Curran, ten guineas. McCann, one guinea. Fred Ryan, two shillings.
Temple, two lunches. Russell, one guinea, Cousins, ten shillings, Bob
Reynolds, half a guinea, Koehler, three guineas, Mrs MacKernan, five
weeks' board. The lump I have is useless.

--For the moment, no, Stephen answered.

Mr Deasy laughed with rich delight, putting back his savingsbox.

--I knew you couldn't, he said joyously. But one day you must feel it.
We are a generous people but we must also be just.

--I fear those big words, Stephen said, which make us so unhappy.

Mr Deasy stared sternly for some moments over the mantelpiece at the
shapely bulk of a man in tartan filibegs: Albert Edward, prince of
Wales.

--You think me an old fogey and an old tory, his thoughtful voice said.
I saw three generations since O'Connell's time. I remember the famine in
'46. Do you know that the orange lodges agitated for repeal of the
union twenty years before O'Connell did or before the prelates of your
communion denounced him as a demagogue? You fenians forget some things.

Glorious, pious and immortal memory. The lodge of Diamond in Armagh the
splendid behung with corpses of papishes. Hoarse, masked and armed, the
planters' covenant. The black north and true blue bible. Croppies lie
down.

Stephen sketched a brief gesture.

--I have rebel blood in me too, Mr Deasy said. On the spindle side. But
I am descended from sir John Blackwood who voted for the union. We are
all Irish, all kings' sons.

--Alas, Stephen said.

--_Per vias rectas_, Mr Deasy said firmly, was his motto. He voted for
it and put on his topboots to ride to Dublin from the Ards of Down to do
so.

     _Lal the ral the ra
     The rocky road to Dublin._


A gruff squire on horseback with shiny topboots. Soft day, sir John!
Soft day, your honour!... Day!... Day!... Two topboots jog dangling
on to Dublin. Lal the ral the ra. Lal the ral the raddy.

--That reminds me, Mr Deasy said. You can do me a favour, Mr Dedalus,
with some of your literary friends. I have a letter here for the press.
Sit down a moment. I have just to copy the end.

He went to the desk near the window, pulled in his chair twice and read
off some words from the sheet on the drum of his typewriter.

--Sit down. Excuse me, he said over his shoulder, _the dictates of
common sense._ Just a moment.

He peered from under his shaggy brows at the manuscript by his elbow
and, muttering, began to prod the stiff buttons of the keyboard slowly,
sometimes blowing as he screwed up the drum to erase an error.

Stephen seated himself noiselessly before the princely presence. Framed
around the walls images of vanished horses stood in homage, their meek
heads poised in air: lord Hastings' Repulse, the duke of Westminster's
Shotover, the duke of Beaufort's Ceylon, _prix de Paris_, 1866. Elfin
riders sat them, watchful of a sign. He saw their speeds, backing king's
colours, and shouted with the shouts of vanished crowds.

--Full stop, Mr Deasy bade his keys. But prompt ventilation of this
allimportant question...

Where Cranly led me to get rich quick, hunting his winners among the
mudsplashed brakes, amid the bawls of bookies on their pitches and reek
of the canteen, over the motley slush. Fair Rebel! Fair Rebel! Even
money the favourite: ten to one the field. Dicers and thimbleriggers
we hurried by after the hoofs, the vying caps and jackets and past
the meatfaced woman, a butcher's dame, nuzzling thirstily her clove of
orange.

Shouts rang shrill from the boys' playfield and a whirring whistle.

Again: a goal. I am among them, among their battling bodies in a medley,
the joust of life. You mean that knockkneed mother's darling who seems
to be slightly crawsick? Jousts. Time shocked rebounds, shock by shock.
Jousts, slush and uproar of battles, the frozen deathspew of the slain,
a shout of spearspikes baited with men's bloodied guts.

--Now then, Mr Deasy said, rising.

He came to the table, pinning together his sheets. Stephen stood up.

--I have put the matter into a nutshell, Mr Deasy said. It's about
the foot and mouth disease. Just look through it. There can be no two
opinions on the matter.

May I trespass on your valuable space. That doctrine of _laissez faire_
which so often in our history. Our cattle trade. The way of all our old
industries. Liverpool ring which jockeyed the Galway harbour scheme.
European conflagration. Grain supplies through the narrow waters of
the channel. The pluterperfect imperturbability of the department of
agriculture. Pardoned a classical allusion. Cassandra. By a woman who
was no better than she should be. To come to the point at issue.

--I don't mince words, do I? Mr Deasy asked as Stephen read on.

Foot and mouth disease. Known as Koch's preparation. Serum and virus.
Percentage of salted horses. Rinderpest. Emperor's horses at Murzsteg,
lower Austria. Veterinary surgeons. Mr Henry Blackwood Price. Courteous
offer a fair trial. Dictates of common sense. Allimportant question. In
every sense of the word take the bull by the horns. Thanking you for the
hospitality of your columns.

--I want that to be printed and read, Mr Deasy said. You will see at the
next outbreak they will put an embargo on Irish cattle. And it can
be cured. It is cured. My cousin, Blackwood Price, writes to me it is
regularly treated and cured in Austria by cattledoctors there. They
offer to come over here. I am trying to work up influence with
the department. Now I'm going to try publicity. I am surrounded by
difficulties, by... intrigues by... backstairs influence by...

He raised his forefinger and beat the air oldly before his voice spoke.

--Mark my words, Mr Dedalus, he said. England is in the hands of the
jews. In all the highest places: her finance, her press. And they are
the signs of a nation's decay. Wherever they gather they eat up the
nation's vital strength. I have seen it coming these years. As sure
as we are standing here the jew merchants are already at their work of
destruction. Old England is dying.

He stepped swiftly off, his eyes coming to blue life as they passed a
broad sunbeam. He faced about and back again.

--Dying, he said again, if not dead by now.

     _The harlot's cry from street to street
     Shall weave old England's windingsheet._


His eyes open wide in vision stared sternly across the sunbeam in which
he halted.

--A merchant, Stephen said, is one who buys cheap and sells dear, jew or
gentile, is he not?

--They sinned against the light, Mr Deasy said gravely. And you can see
the darkness in their eyes. And that is why they are wanderers on the
earth to this day.

On the steps of the Paris stock exchange the goldskinned men quoting
prices on their gemmed fingers. Gabble of geese. They swarmed loud,
uncouth about the temple, their heads thickplotting under maladroit silk
hats. Not theirs: these clothes, this speech, these gestures. Their full
slow eyes belied the words, the gestures eager and unoffending, but
knew the rancours massed about them and knew their zeal was vain. Vain
patience to heap and hoard. Time surely would scatter all. A hoard
heaped by the roadside: plundered and passing on. Their eyes knew their
years of wandering and, patient, knew the dishonours of their flesh.

--Who has not? Stephen said.

--What do you mean? Mr Deasy asked.

He came forward a pace and stood by the table. His underjaw fell
sideways open uncertainly. Is this old wisdom? He waits to hear from me.

--History, Stephen said, is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake.

From the playfield the boys raised a shout. A whirring whistle: goal.
What if that nightmare gave you a back kick?

--The ways of the Creator are not our ways, Mr Deasy said. All human
history moves towards one great goal, the manifestation of God.

Stephen jerked his thumb towards the window, saying:

--That is God.

Hooray! Ay! Whrrwhee!

--What? Mr Deasy asked.

--A shout in the street, Stephen answered, shrugging his shoulders.

Mr Deasy looked down and held for awhile the wings of his nose tweaked
between his fingers. Looking up again he set them free.

--I am happier than you are, he said. We have committed many errors and
many sins. A woman brought sin into the world. For a woman who was no
better than she should be, Helen, the runaway wife of Menelaus, ten
years the Greeks made war on Troy. A faithless wife first brought the
strangers to our shore here, MacMurrough's wife and her leman, O'Rourke,
prince of Breffni. A woman too brought Parnell low. Many errors, many
failures but not the one sin. I am a struggler now at the end of my
days. But I will fight for the right till the end.

     _For Ulster will fight
     And Ulster will be right._


Stephen raised the sheets in his hand.

--Well, sir, he began...

--I foresee, Mr Deasy said, that you will not remain here very long
at this work. You were not born to be a teacher, I think. Perhaps I am
wrong.

--A learner rather, Stephen said.

And here what will you learn more?

Mr Deasy shook his head.

--Who knows? he said. To learn one must be humble. But life is the great
teacher.

Stephen rustled the sheets again.

--As regards these, he began.

--Yes, Mr Deasy said. You have two copies there. If you can have them
published at once.

_ Telegraph. Irish Homestead._

--I will try, Stephen said, and let you know tomorrow. I know two
editors slightly.

--That will do, Mr Deasy said briskly. I wrote last night to Mr Field,
M.P. There is a meeting of the cattletraders' association today at the
City Arms hotel. I asked him to lay my letter before the meeting. You
see if you can get it into your two papers. What are they?

_--The Evening Telegraph..._

--That will do, Mr Deasy said. There is no time to lose. Now I have to
answer that letter from my cousin.

--Good morning, sir, Stephen said, putting the sheets in his pocket.
Thank you.

--Not at all, Mr Deasy said as he searched the papers on his desk. I
like to break a lance with you, old as I am.

--Good morning, sir, Stephen said again, bowing to his bent back.

He went out by the open porch and down the gravel path under the trees,
hearing the cries of voices and crack of sticks from the playfield.
The lions couchant on the pillars as he passed out through the gate:
toothless terrors. Still I will help him in his fight. Mulligan will dub
me a new name: the bullockbefriending bard.

--Mr Dedalus!

Running after me. No more letters, I hope.

--Just one moment.

--Yes, sir, Stephen said, turning back at the gate.

Mr Deasy halted, breathing hard and swallowing his breath.

--I just wanted to say, he said. Ireland, they say, has the honour of
being the only country which never persecuted the jews. Do you know
that? No. And do you know why?

He frowned sternly on the bright air.

--Why, sir? Stephen asked, beginning to smile.

--Because she never let them in, Mr Deasy said solemnly.

A coughball of laughter leaped from his throat dragging after it a
rattling chain of phlegm. He turned back quickly, coughing, laughing,
his lifted arms waving to the air.

--She never let them in, he cried again through his laughter as he
stamped on gaitered feet over the gravel of the path. That's why.

On his wise shoulders through the checkerwork of leaves the sun flung
spangles, dancing coins.


Ineluctable modality of the visible: at least that if no more, thought
through my eyes. Signatures of all things I am here to read, seaspawn
and seawrack, the nearing tide, that rusty boot. Snotgreen, bluesilver,
rust: coloured signs. Limits of the diaphane. But he adds: in bodies.
Then he was aware of them bodies before of them coloured. How? By
knocking his sconce against them, sure. Go easy. Bald he was and a
millionaire, _maestro di color che sanno_. Limit of the diaphane in. Why
in? Diaphane, adiaphane. If you can put your five fingers through it it
is a gate, if not a door. Shut your eyes and see.


Stephen closed his eyes to hear his boots crush crackling wrack and
shells. You are walking through it howsomever. I am, a stride at a time.
A very short space of time through very short times of space. Five, six:
the _nacheinander_. Exactly: and that is the ineluctable modality of the
audible. Open your eyes. No. Jesus! If I fell over a cliff that beetles
o'er his base, fell through the _nebeneinander_ ineluctably! I am
getting on nicely in the dark. My ash sword hangs at my side. Tap with
it: they do. My two feet in his boots are at the ends of his legs,
_nebeneinander_. Sounds solid: made by the mallet of _Los Demiurgos_.
Am I walking into eternity along Sandymount strand? Crush, crack, crick,
crick. Wild sea money. Dominie Deasy kens them a'. Won't you come to
Sandymount, Madeline the mare?


Rhythm begins, you see. I hear. Acatalectic tetrameter of iambs
marching. No, agallop: _deline the mare_.

Open your eyes now. I will. One moment. Has all vanished since? If I
open and am for ever in the black adiaphane. _Basta_! I will see if I
can see.

See now. There all the time without you: and ever shall be, world
without end.

They came down the steps from Leahy's terrace prudently, _Frauenzimmer_:
and down the shelving shore flabbily, their splayed feet sinking in
the silted sand. Like me, like Algy, coming down to our mighty mother.
Number one swung lourdily her midwife's bag, the other's gamp poked in
the beach. From the liberties, out for the day. Mrs Florence MacCabe,
relict of the late Patk MacCabe, deeply lamented, of Bride Street. One
of her sisterhood lugged me squealing into life. Creation from nothing.
What has she in the bag? A misbirth with a trailing navelcord, hushed
in ruddy wool. The cords of all link back, strandentwining cable of
all flesh. That is why mystic monks. Will you be as gods? Gaze in your
omphalos. Hello! Kinch here. Put me on to Edenville. Aleph, alpha:
nought, nought, one.

Spouse and helpmate of Adam Kadmon: Heva, naked Eve. She had no navel.
Gaze. Belly without blemish, bulging big, a buckler of taut vellum,
no, whiteheaped corn, orient and immortal, standing from everlasting to
everlasting. Womb of sin.

Wombed in sin darkness I was too, made not begotten. By them, the man
with my voice and my eyes and a ghostwoman with ashes on her breath.
They clasped and sundered, did the coupler's will. From before the ages
He willed me and now may not will me away or ever. A _lex eterna_ stays
about Him. Is that then the divine substance wherein Father and Son are
consubstantial? Where is poor dear Arius to try conclusions? Warring
his life long upon the contransmagnificandjewbangtantiality. Illstarred
heresiarch' In a Greek watercloset he breathed his last: euthanasia.
With beaded mitre and with crozier, stalled upon his throne, widower of
a widowed see, with upstiffed omophorion, with clotted hinderparts.

Airs romped round him, nipping and eager airs. They are coming, waves.
The whitemaned seahorses, champing, brightwindbridled, the steeds of
Mananaan.

I mustn't forget his letter for the press. And after? The Ship, half
twelve. By the way go easy with that money like a good young imbecile.

Yes, I must.

His pace slackened. Here. Am I going to aunt Sara's or not? My
consubstantial father's voice. Did you see anything of your artist
brother Stephen lately? No? Sure he's not down in Strasburg terrace with
his aunt Sally? Couldn't he fly a bit higher than that, eh? And and and
and tell us, Stephen, how is uncle Si? O, weeping God, the things I
married into! De boys up in de hayloft. The drunken little costdrawer
and his brother, the cornet player. Highly respectable gondoliers! And
skeweyed Walter sirring his father, no less! Sir. Yes, sir. No, sir.
Jesus wept: and no wonder, by Christ!

I pull the wheezy bell of their shuttered cottage: and wait. They take
me for a dun, peer out from a coign of vantage.

--It's Stephen, sir.

--Let him in. Let Stephen in.

A bolt drawn back and Walter welcomes me.

--We thought you were someone else.

In his broad bed nuncle Richie, pillowed and blanketed, extends over the
hillock of his knees a sturdy forearm. Cleanchested. He has washed the
upper moiety.

--Morrow, nephew.

He lays aside the lapboard whereon he drafts his bills of costs for
the eyes of master Goff and master Shapland Tandy, filing consents and
common searches and a writ of _Duces Tecum_. A bogoak frame over his
bald head: Wilde's _Requiescat_. The drone of his misleading whistle
brings Walter back.

--Yes, sir?

--Malt for Richie and Stephen, tell mother. Where is she?

--Bathing Crissie, sir.

Papa's little bedpal. Lump of love.

--No, uncle Richie...

--Call me Richie. Damn your lithia water. It lowers. Whusky!

--Uncle Richie, really...

--Sit down or by the law Harry I'll knock you down.

Walter squints vainly for a chair.

--He has nothing to sit down on, sir.

--He has nowhere to put it, you mug. Bring in our chippendale chair.
Would you like a bite of something? None of your damned lawdeedaw airs
here. The rich of a rasher fried with a herring? Sure? So much the
better. We have nothing in the house but backache pills.

_All'erta_!

He drones bars of Ferrando's _aria di sortita_. The grandest number,
Stephen, in the whole opera. Listen.

His tuneful whistle sounds again, finely shaded, with rushes of the air,
his fists bigdrumming on his padded knees.

This wind is sweeter.

Houses of decay, mine, his and all. You told the Clongowes gentry you
had an uncle a judge and an uncle a general in the army. Come out of
them, Stephen. Beauty is not there. Nor in the stagnant bay of Marsh's
library where you read the fading prophecies of Joachim Abbas. For whom?
The hundredheaded rabble of the cathedral close. A hater of his kind
ran from them to the wood of madness, his mane foaming in the moon,
his eyeballs stars. Houyhnhnm, horsenostrilled. The oval equine
faces, Temple, Buck Mulligan, Foxy Campbell, Lanternjaws. Abbas
father,--furious dean, what offence laid fire to their brains? Paff!
_Descende, calve, ut ne amplius decalveris_. A garland of grey hair
on his comminated head see him me clambering down to the footpace
(_descende_!), clutching a monstrance, basiliskeyed. Get down, baldpoll!
A choir gives back menace and echo, assisting about the altar's horns,
the snorted Latin of jackpriests moving burly in their albs, tonsured
and oiled and gelded, fat with the fat of kidneys of wheat.

And at the same instant perhaps a priest round the corner is elevating
it. Dringdring! And two streets off another locking it into a pyx.
Dringadring! And in a ladychapel another taking housel all to his own
cheek. Dringdring! Down, up, forward, back. Dan Occam thought of that,
invincible doctor. A misty English morning the imp hypostasis tickled
his brain. Bringing his host down and kneeling he heard twine with his
second bell the first bell in the transept (he is lifting his) and,
rising, heard (now I am lifting) their two bells (he is kneeling) twang
in diphthong.

Cousin Stephen, you will never be a saint. Isle of saints. You were
awfully holy, weren't you? You prayed to the Blessed Virgin that you
might not have a red nose. You prayed to the devil in Serpentine avenue
that the fubsy widow in front might lift her clothes still more from the
wet street. _O si, certo_! Sell your soul for that, do, dyed rags pinned
round a squaw. More tell me, more still!! On the top of the Howth tram
alone crying to the rain: Naked women! _naked women_! What about that,
eh?

What about what? What else were they invented for?

Reading two pages apiece of seven books every night, eh? I was young.
You bowed to yourself in the mirror, stepping forward to applause
earnestly, striking face. Hurray for the Goddamned idiot! Hray! No-one
saw: tell no-one. Books you were going to write with letters for titles.
Have you read his F? O yes, but I prefer Q. Yes, but W is wonderful. O
yes, W. Remember your epiphanies written on green oval leaves, deeply
deep, copies to be sent if you died to all the great libraries of the
world, including Alexandria? Someone was to read them there after a few
thousand years, a mahamanvantara. Pico della Mirandola like. Ay, very
like a whale. When one reads these strange pages of one long gone one
feels that one is at one with one who once...

The grainy sand had gone from under his feet. His boots trod again
a damp crackling mast, razorshells, squeaking pebbles, that on the
unnumbered pebbles beats, wood sieved by the shipworm, lost Armada.
Unwholesome sandflats waited to suck his treading soles, breathing
upward sewage breath, a pocket of seaweed smouldered in seafire under a
midden of man's ashes. He coasted them, walking warily. A porterbottle
stood up, stogged to its waist, in the cakey sand dough. A sentinel:
isle of dreadful thirst. Broken hoops on the shore; at the land a maze
of dark cunning nets; farther away chalkscrawled backdoors and on the
higher beach a dryingline with two crucified shirts. Ringsend: wigwams
of brown steersmen and master mariners. Human shells.

He halted. I have passed the way to aunt Sara's. Am I not going there?
Seems not. No-one about. He turned northeast and crossed the firmer sand
towards the Pigeonhouse.

_--Qui vous a mis dans cette fichue position?_

_--c'est le pigeon, Joseph._

Patrice, home on furlough, lapped warm milk with me in the bar MacMahon.
Son of the wild goose, Kevin Egan of Paris. My father's a bird, he
lapped the sweet _lait chaud_ with pink young tongue, plump bunny's
face. Lap, _lapin._ He hopes to win in the _gros lots_. About the nature
of women he read in Michelet. But he must send me _La Vie de Jesus_ by
M. Leo Taxil. Lent it to his friend.

_--C'est tordant, vous savez. Moi, je suis socialiste. Je ne crois pas
en l'existence de Dieu. Faut pas le dire a mon p-re._

_--Il croit?_

_--Mon pere, oui._

_Schluss_. He laps.

My Latin quarter hat. God, we simply must dress the character. I want
puce gloves. You were a student, weren't you? Of what in the other
devil's name? Paysayenn. P. C. N., you know: _physiques, chimiques et
naturelles_. Aha. Eating your groatsworth of _mou en civet_, fleshpots
of Egypt, elbowed by belching cabmen. Just say in the most natural
tone: when I was in Paris; _boul' Mich'_, I used to. Yes, used to
carry punched tickets to prove an alibi if they arrested you for murder
somewhere. Justice. On the night of the seventeenth of February 1904 the
prisoner was seen by two witnesses. Other fellow did it: other me.
Hat, tie, overcoat, nose. _Lui, c'est moi_. You seem to have enjoyed
yourself.

Proudly walking. Whom were you trying to walk like? Forget: a
dispossessed. With mother's money order, eight shillings, the banging
door of the post office slammed in your face by the usher. Hunger
toothache. _Encore deux minutes_. Look clock. Must get. _Ferme_. Hired
dog! Shoot him to bloody bits with a bang shotgun, bits man spattered
walls all brass buttons. Bits all khrrrrklak in place clack back. Not
hurt? O, that's all right. Shake hands. See what I meant, see? O, that's
all right. Shake a shake. O, that's all only all right.

You were going to do wonders, what? Missionary to Europe after fiery
Columbanus. Fiacre and Scotus on their creepystools in heaven spilt from
their pintpots, loudlatinlaughing: _Euge! Euge_! Pretending to speak
broken English as you dragged your valise, porter threepence, across
the slimy pier at Newhaven. _Comment?_ Rich booty you brought back; _Le
Tutu_, five tattered numbers of _Pantalon Blanc et Culotte Rouge_; a
blue French telegram, curiosity to show:

--Mother dying come home father.

The aunt thinks you killed your mother. That's why she won't.

     _Then here's a health to Mulligan's aunt
     And I'll tell you the reason why.
     She always kept things decent in
     The Hannigan famileye._


His feet marched in sudden proud rhythm over the sand furrows, along by
the boulders of the south wall. He stared at them proudly, piled stone
mammoth skulls. Gold light on sea, on sand, on boulders. The sun is
there, the slender trees, the lemon houses.

Paris rawly waking, crude sunlight on her lemon streets. Moist pith of
farls of bread, the froggreen wormwood, her matin incense, court
the air. Belluomo rises from the bed of his wife's lover's wife, the
kerchiefed housewife is astir, a saucer of acetic acid in her hand. In
Rodot's Yvonne and Madeleine newmake their tumbled beauties, shattering
with gold teeth _chaussons_ of pastry, their mouths yellowed with the
_pus_ of _flan breton_. Faces of Paris men go by, their wellpleased
pleasers, curled conquistadores.

Noon slumbers. Kevin Egan rolls gunpowder cigarettes through fingers
smeared with printer's ink, sipping his green fairy as Patrice his
white. About us gobblers fork spiced beans down their gullets. _Un demi
setier!_ A jet of coffee steam from the burnished caldron. She serves me
at his beck. _Il est irlandais. Hollandais? Non fromage. Deux irlandais,
nous, Irlande, vous savez ah, oui!_ She thought you wanted a cheese
_hollandais_. Your postprandial, do you know that word? Postprandial.
There was a fellow I knew once in Barcelona, queer fellow, used to call
it his postprandial. Well: _slainte_! Around the slabbed tables the
tangle of wined breaths and grumbling gorges. His breath hangs over our
saucestained plates, the green fairy's fang thrusting between his lips.
Of Ireland, the Dalcassians, of hopes, conspiracies, of Arthur Griffith
now, A E, pimander, good shepherd of men. To yoke me as his yokefellow,
our crimes our common cause. You're your father's son. I know the voice.
His fustian shirt, sanguineflowered, trembles its Spanish tassels at
his secrets. M. Drumont, famous journalist, Drumont, know what he called
queen Victoria? Old hag with the yellow teeth. _Vieille ogresse_
with the _dents jaunes_. Maud Gonne, beautiful woman, _La Patrie_, M.
Millevoye, Felix Faure, know how he died? Licentious men. The froeken,
_bonne a tout faire_, who rubs male nakedness in the bath at Upsala.
_Moi faire_, she said, _Tous les messieurs_. Not this _Monsieur_, I
said. Most licentious custom. Bath a most private thing. I wouldn't let
my brother, not even my own brother, most lascivious thing. Green eyes,
I see you. Fang, I feel. Lascivious people.

The blue fuse burns deadly between hands and burns clear. Loose
tobaccoshreds catch fire: a flame and acrid smoke light our corner. Raw
facebones under his peep of day boy's hat. How the head centre got away,
authentic version. Got up as a young bride, man, veil, orangeblossoms,
drove out the road to Malahide. Did, faith. Of lost leaders, the
betrayed, wild escapes. Disguises, clutched at, gone, not here.

Spurned lover. I was a strapping young gossoon at that time, I tell you.
I'll show you my likeness one day. I was, faith. Lover, for her love he
prowled with colonel Richard Burke, tanist of his sept, under the walls
of Clerkenwell and, crouching, saw a flame of vengeance hurl them upward
in the fog. Shattered glass and toppling masonry. In gay Paree he hides,
Egan of Paris, unsought by any save by me. Making his day's stations,
the dingy printingcase, his three taverns, the Montmartre lair he sleeps
short night in, rue de la Goutte-d'Or, damascened with flyblown faces of
the gone. Loveless, landless, wifeless. She is quite nicey comfy
without her outcast man, madame in rue Git-le-Coeur, canary and two
buck lodgers. Peachy cheeks, a zebra skirt, frisky as a young thing's.
Spurned and undespairing. Tell Pat you saw me, won't you? I wanted to
get poor Pat a job one time. _Mon fils_, soldier of France. I taught him
to sing _The boys of Kilkenny are stout roaring blades_. Know that old
lay? I taught Patrice that. Old Kilkenny: saint Canice, Strongbow's
castle on the Nore. Goes like this. O, O. He takes me, Napper Tandy, by
the hand.

     _O, O THE BOYS OF
     KILKENNY..._


Weak wasting hand on mine. They have forgotten Kevin Egan, not he them.
Remembering thee, O Sion.

He had come nearer the edge of the sea and wet sand slapped his boots.
The new air greeted him, harping in wild nerves, wind of wild air of
seeds of brightness. Here, I am not walking out to the Kish lightship,
am I? He stood suddenly, his feet beginning to sink slowly in the
quaking soil. Turn back.

Turning, he scanned the shore south, his feet sinking again slowly
in new sockets. The cold domed room of the tower waits. Through the
barbacans the shafts of light are moving ever, slowly ever as my
feet are sinking, creeping duskward over the dial floor. Blue dusk,
nightfall, deep blue night. In the darkness of the dome they wait,
their pushedback chairs, my obelisk valise, around a board of abandoned
platters. Who to clear it? He has the key. I will not sleep there when
this night comes. A shut door of a silent tower, entombing their--blind
bodies, the panthersahib and his pointer. Call: no answer. He lifted his
feet up from the suck and turned back by the mole of boulders. Take
all, keep all. My soul walks with me, form of forms. So in the moon's
midwatches I pace the path above the rocks, in sable silvered, hearing
Elsinore's tempting flood.

The flood is following me. I can watch it flow past from here. Get back
then by the Poolbeg road to the strand there. He climbed over the sedge
and eely oarweeds and sat on a stool of rock, resting his ashplant in a
grike.

A bloated carcass of a dog lay lolled on bladderwrack. Before him the
gunwale of a boat, sunk in sand. _Un coche ensablÃ©_ Louis Veuillot
called Gautier's prose. These heavy sands are language tide and wind
have silted here. And these, the stoneheaps of dead builders, a warren
of weasel rats. Hide gold there. Try it. You have some. Sands and
stones. Heavy of the past. Sir Lout's toys. Mind you don't get one
bang on the ear. I'm the bloody well gigant rolls all them bloody well
boulders, bones for my steppingstones. Feefawfum. I zmellz de bloodz odz
an Iridzman.

A point, live dog, grew into sight running across the sweep of sand.
Lord, is he going to attack me? Respect his liberty. You will not
be master of others or their slave. I have my stick. Sit tight. From
farther away, walking shoreward across from the crested tide, figures,
two. The two maries. They have tucked it safe mong the bulrushes.
Peekaboo. I see you. No, the dog. He is running back to them. Who?

Galleys of the Lochlanns ran here to beach, in quest of prey, their
bloodbeaked prows riding low on a molten pewter surf. Dane vikings,
torcs of tomahawks aglitter on their breasts when Malachi wore the
collar of gold. A school of turlehide whales stranded in hot noon,
spouting, hobbling in the shallows. Then from the starving cagework city
a horde of jerkined dwarfs, my people, with flayers' knives, running,
scaling, hacking in green blubbery whalemeat. Famine, plague and
slaughters. Their blood is in me, their lusts my waves. I moved among
them on the frozen Liffey, that I, a changeling, among the spluttering
resin fires. I spoke to no-one: none to me.

The dog's bark ran towards him, stopped, ran back. Dog of my enemy. I
just simply stood pale, silent, bayed about. _Terribilia meditans_. A
primrose doublet, fortune's knave, smiled on my fear. For that are you
pining, the bark of their applause? Pretenders: live their lives. The
Bruce's brother, Thomas Fitzgerald, silken knight, Perkin Warbeck,
York's false scion, in breeches of silk of whiterose ivory, wonder of
a day, and Lambert Simnel, with a tail of nans and sutlers, a scullion
crowned. All kings' sons. Paradise of pretenders then and now. He saved
men from drowning and you shake at a cur's yelping. But the courtiers
who mocked Guido in Or san Michele were in their own house. House of...
We don't want any of your medieval abstrusiosities. Would you do what he
did? A boat would be near, a lifebuoy. _NatÃ¼rlich_, put there for you.
Would you or would you not? The man that was drowned nine days ago off
Maiden's rock. They are waiting for him now. The truth, spit it out. I
would want to. I would try. I am not a strong swimmer. Water cold soft.
When I put my face into it in the basin at Clongowes. Can't see! Who's
behind me? Out quickly, quickly! Do you see the tide flowing quickly in
on all sides, sheeting the lows of sand quickly, shellcocoacoloured? If
I had land under my feet. I want his life still to be his, mine to be
mine. A drowning man. His human eyes scream to me out of horror of his
death. I... With him together down... I could not save her. Waters:
bitter death: lost.

A woman and a man. I see her skirties. Pinned up, I bet.

Their dog ambled about a bank of dwindling sand, trotting, sniffing on
all sides. Looking for something lost in a past life. Suddenly he made
off like a bounding hare, ears flung back, chasing the shadow of a
lowskimming gull. The man's shrieked whistle struck his limp ears. He
turned, bounded back, came nearer, trotted on twinkling shanks. On a
field tenney a buck, trippant, proper, unattired. At the lacefringe of
the tide he halted with stiff forehoofs, seawardpointed ears. His
snout lifted barked at the wavenoise, herds of seamorse. They serpented
towards his feet, curling, unfurling many crests, every ninth, breaking,
plashing, from far, from farther out, waves and waves.

Cocklepickers. They waded a little way in the water and, stooping,
soused their bags and, lifting them again, waded out. The dog yelped
running to them, reared up and pawed them, dropping on all fours, again
reared up at them with mute bearish fawning. Unheeded he kept by them as
they came towards the drier sand, a rag of wolf's tongue redpanting from
his jaws. His speckled body ambled ahead of them and then loped off at a
calf's gallop. The carcass lay on his path. He stopped, sniffed, stalked
round it, brother, nosing closer, went round it, sniffling rapidly like
a dog all over the dead dog's bedraggled fell. Dogskull, dogsniff, eyes
on the ground, moves to one great goal. Ah, poor dogsbody! Here lies
poor dogsbody's body.

--Tatters! Out of that, you mongrel!

The cry brought him skulking back to his master and a blunt bootless
kick sent him unscathed across a spit of sand, crouched in flight. He
slunk back in a curve. Doesn't see me. Along by the edge of the mole he
lolloped, dawdled, smelt a rock and from under a cocked hindleg pissed
against it. He trotted forward and, lifting again his hindleg, pissed
quick short at an unsmelt rock. The simple pleasures of the poor. His
hindpaws then scattered the sand: then his forepaws dabbled and delved.
Something he buried there, his grandmother. He rooted in the sand,
dabbling, delving and stopped to listen to the air, scraped up the sand
again with a fury of his claws, soon ceasing, a pard, a panther, got in
spousebreach, vulturing the dead.

After he woke me last night same dream or was it? Wait. Open hallway.
Street of harlots. Remember. Haroun al Raschid. I am almosting it. That
man led me, spoke. I was not afraid. The melon he had he held against my
face. Smiled: creamfruit smell. That was the rule, said. In. Come. Red
carpet spread. You will see who.

Shouldering their bags they trudged, the red Egyptians. His blued feet
out of turnedup trousers slapped the clammy sand, a dull brick muffler
strangling his unshaven neck. With woman steps she followed: the
ruffian and his strolling mort. Spoils slung at her back. Loose sand and
shellgrit crusted her bare feet. About her windraw face hair trailed.
Behind her lord, his helpmate, bing awast to Romeville. When night hides
her body's flaws calling under her brown shawl from an archway
where dogs have mired. Her fancyman is treating two Royal Dublins in
O'Loughlin's of Blackpitts. Buss her, wap in rogues' rum lingo, for, O,
my dimber wapping dell! A shefiend's whiteness under her rancid rags.
Fumbally's lane that night: the tanyard smells.

     _White thy fambles, red thy gan
     And thy quarrons dainty is.
     Couch a hogshead with me then.
     In the darkmans clip and kiss._


Morose delectation Aquinas tunbelly calls this, _frate porcospino_.
Unfallen Adam rode and not rutted. Call away let him: _thy quarrons
dainty is_. Language no whit worse than his. Monkwords, marybeads jabber
on their girdles: roguewords, tough nuggets patter in their pockets.

Passing now.

A side eye at my Hamlet hat. If I were suddenly naked here as I sit? I
am not. Across the sands of all the world, followed by the sun's flaming
sword, to the west, trekking to evening lands. She trudges, schlepps,
trains, drags, trascines her load. A tide westering, moondrawn, in
her wake. Tides, myriadislanded, within her, blood not mine, _oinopa
ponton_, a winedark sea. Behold the handmaid of the moon. In sleep
the wet sign calls her hour, bids her rise. Bridebed, childbed, bed of
death, ghostcandled. _Omnis caro ad te veniet_. He comes, pale vampire,
through storm his eyes, his bat sails bloodying the sea, mouth to her
mouth's kiss.

Here. Put a pin in that chap, will you? My tablets. Mouth to her kiss.

No. Must be two of em. Glue em well. Mouth to her mouth's kiss.

His lips lipped and mouthed fleshless lips of air: mouth to her moomb.
Oomb, allwombing tomb. His mouth moulded issuing breath, unspeeched:
ooeeehah: roar of cataractic planets, globed, blazing, roaring
wayawayawayawayaway. Paper. The banknotes, blast them. Old Deasy's
letter. Here. Thanking you for the hospitality tear the blank end off.
Turning his back to the sun he bent over far to a table of rock and
scribbled words. That's twice I forgot to take slips from the library
counter.

His shadow lay over the rocks as he bent, ending. Why not endless till
the farthest star? Darkly they are there behind this light, darkness
shining in the brightness, delta of Cassiopeia, worlds. Me sits there
with his augur's rod of ash, in borrowed sandals, by day beside a livid
sea, unbeheld, in violet night walking beneath a reign of uncouth stars.
I throw this ended shadow from me, manshape ineluctable, call it back.
Endless, would it be mine, form of my form? Who watches me here? Who
ever anywhere will read these written words? Signs on a white field.
Somewhere to someone in your flutiest voice. The good bishop of Cloyne
took the veil of the temple out of his shovel hat: veil of space with
coloured emblems hatched on its field. Hold hard. Coloured on a flat:
yes, that's right. Flat I see, then think distance, near, far, flat
I see, east, back. Ah, see now! Falls back suddenly, frozen in
stereoscope. Click does the trick. You find my words dark. Darkness is
in our souls do you not think? Flutier. Our souls, shamewounded by our
sins, cling to us yet more, a woman to her lover clinging, the more the
more.

She trusts me, her hand gentle, the longlashed eyes. Now where the blue
hell am I bringing her beyond the veil? Into the ineluctable modality of
the ineluctable visuality. She, she, she. What she? The virgin at Hodges
Figgis' window on Monday looking in for one of the alphabet books you
were going to write. Keen glance you gave her. Wrist through the
braided jesse of her sunshade. She lives in Leeson park with a grief
and kickshaws, a lady of letters. Talk that to someone else, Stevie: a
pickmeup. Bet she wears those curse of God stays suspenders and
yellow stockings, darned with lumpy wool. Talk about apple dumplings,
_piuttosto_. Where are your wits?

Touch me. Soft eyes. Soft soft soft hand. I am lonely here. O, touch me
soon, now. What is that word known to all men? I am quiet here alone.
Sad too. Touch, touch me.

He lay back at full stretch over the sharp rocks, cramming the scribbled
note and pencil into a pock his hat. His hat down on his eyes. That is
Kevin Egan's movement I made, nodding for his nap, sabbath sleep. _Et
vidit Deus. Et erant valde bona_. Alo! _Bonjour_. Welcome as the flowers
in May. Under its leaf he watched through peacocktwittering lashes the
southing sun. I am caught in this burning scene. Pan's hour, the faunal
noon. Among gumheavy serpentplants, milkoozing fruits, where on the
tawny waters leaves lie wide. Pain is far.

     _And no more turn aside and brood._

His gaze brooded on his broadtoed boots, a buck's castoffs,
_nebeneinander_. He counted the creases of rucked leather wherein
another's foot had nested warm. The foot that beat the ground in
tripudium, foot I dislove. But you were delighted when Esther Osvalt's
shoe went on you: girl I knew in Paris. _Tiens, quel petit pied!_
Staunch friend, a brother soul: Wilde's love that dare not speak its
name. His arm: Cranly's arm. He now will leave me. And the blame? As I
am. As I am. All or not at all.

In long lassoes from the Cock lake the water flowed full, covering
greengoldenly lagoons of sand, rising, flowing. My ashplant will float
away. I shall wait. No, they will pass on, passing, chafing against the
low rocks, swirling, passing. Better get this job over quick. Listen: a
fourworded wavespeech: seesoo, hrss, rsseeiss, ooos. Vehement breath of
waters amid seasnakes, rearing horses, rocks. In cups of rocks it slops:
flop, slop, slap: bounded in barrels. And, spent, its speech ceases. It
flows purling, widely flowing, floating foampool, flower unfurling.

Under the upswelling tide he saw the writhing weeds lift languidly and
sway reluctant arms, hising up their petticoats, in whispering water
swaying and upturning coy silver fronds. Day by day: night by night:
lifted, flooded and let fall. Lord, they are weary; and, whispered to,
they sigh. Saint Ambrose heard it, sigh of leaves and waves, waiting,
awaiting the fullness of their times, _diebus ac noctibus iniurias
patiens ingemiscit_. To no end gathered; vainly then released,
forthflowing, wending back: loom of the moon. Weary too in sight of
lovers, lascivious men, a naked woman shining in her courts, she draws a
toil of waters.

Five fathoms out there. Full fathom five thy father lies. At one, he
said. Found drowned. High water at Dublin bar. Driving before it a loose
drift of rubble, fanshoals of fishes, silly shells. A corpse rising
saltwhite from the undertow, bobbing a pace a pace a porpoise landward.
There he is. Hook it quick. Pull. Sunk though he be beneath the watery
floor. We have him. Easy now.

Bag of corpsegas sopping in foul brine. A quiver of minnows, fat of a
spongy titbit, flash through the slits of his buttoned trouserfly.
God becomes man becomes fish becomes barnacle goose becomes featherbed
mountain. Dead breaths I living breathe, tread dead dust, devour a
urinous offal from all dead. Hauled stark over the gunwale he breathes
upward the stench of his green grave, his leprous nosehole snoring to
the sun.

A seachange this, brown eyes saltblue. Seadeath, mildest of all deaths
known to man. Old Father Ocean. _Prix de paris_: beware of imitations.
Just you give it a fair trial. We enjoyed ourselves immensely.

Come. I thirst. Clouding over. No black clouds anywhere, are there?
Thunderstorm. Allbright he falls, proud lightning of the intellect,
_Lucifer, dico, qui nescit occasum_. No. My cockle hat and staff and
hismy sandal shoon. Where? To evening lands. Evening will find itself.

He took the hilt of his ashplant, lunging with it softly, dallying
still. Yes, evening will find itself in me, without me. All days make
their end. By the way next when is it Tuesday will be the longest
day. Of all the glad new year, mother, the rum tum tiddledy tum. Lawn
Tennyson, gentleman poet. _GiÃ _. For the old hag with the yellow teeth.
And Monsieur Drumont, gentleman journalist. _GiÃ _. My teeth are very
bad. Why, I wonder. Feel. That one is going too. Shells. Ought I go to a
dentist, I wonder, with that money? That one. This. Toothless Kinch, the
superman. Why is that, I wonder, or does it mean something perhaps?

My handkerchief. He threw it. I remember. Did I not take it up?

His hand groped vainly in his pockets. No, I didn't. Better buy one.

He laid the dry snot picked from his nostril on a ledge of rock,
carefully. For the rest let look who will.

Behind. Perhaps there is someone.

He turned his face over a shoulder, rere regardant. Moving through the
air high spars of a threemaster, her sails brailed up on the crosstrees,
homing, upstream, silently moving, a silent ship. +




-- II --

Mr Leopold Bloom ate with relish the inner organs of beasts and fowls.
He liked thick giblet soup, nutty gizzards, a stuffed roast heart,
liverslices fried with crustcrumbs, fried hencods' roes. Most of all
he liked grilled mutton kidneys which gave to his palate a fine tang of
faintly scented urine.

Kidneys were in his mind as he moved about the kitchen softly, righting
her breakfast things on the humpy tray. Gelid light and air were in the
kitchen but out of doors gentle summer morning everywhere. Made him feel
a bit peckish.

The coals were reddening.

Another slice of bread and butter: three, four: right. She didn't like
her plate full. Right. He turned from the tray, lifted the kettle off
the hob and set it sideways on the fire. It sat there, dull and squat,
its spout stuck out. Cup of tea soon. Good. Mouth dry. The cat walked
stiffly round a leg of the table with tail on high.

--Mkgnao!

--O, there you are, Mr Bloom said, turning from the fire.

The cat mewed in answer and stalked again stiffly round a leg of the
table, mewing. Just how she stalks over my writingtable. Prr. Scratch my
head. Prr.

Mr Bloom watched curiously, kindly the lithe black form. Clean to see:
the gloss of her sleek hide, the white button under the butt of her
tail, the green flashing eyes. He bent down to her, his hands on his
knees.

--Milk for the pussens, he said.

--Mrkgnao! the cat cried.

They call them stupid. They understand what we say better than we
understand them. She understands all she wants to. Vindictive too.
Cruel. Her nature. Curious mice never squeal. Seem to like it. Wonder
what I look like to her. Height of a tower? No, she can jump me.

--Afraid of the chickens she is, he said mockingly. Afraid of the
chookchooks. I never saw such a stupid pussens as the pussens.

Cruel. Her nature. Curious mice never squeal. Seem to like it.

--Mrkrgnao! the cat said loudly.

She blinked up out of her avid shameclosing eyes, mewing plaintively
and long, showing him her milkwhite teeth. He watched the dark eyeslits
narrowing with greed till her eyes were green stones. Then he went to
the dresser, took the jug Hanlon's milkman had just filled for him,
poured warmbubbled milk on a saucer and set it slowly on the floor.

--Gurrhr! she cried, running to lap.

He watched the bristles shining wirily in the weak light as she tipped
three times and licked lightly. Wonder is it true if you clip them they
can't mouse after. Why? They shine in the dark, perhaps, the tips. Or
kind of feelers in the dark, perhaps.

He listened to her licking lap. Ham and eggs, no. No good eggs with this
drouth. Want pure fresh water. Thursday: not a good day either for a
mutton kidney at Buckley's. Fried with butter, a shake of pepper. Better
a pork kidney at Dlugacz's. While the kettle is boiling. She lapped
slower, then licking the saucer clean. Why are their tongues so rough?
To lap better, all porous holes. Nothing she can eat? He glanced round
him. No.

On quietly creaky boots he went up the staircase to the hall, paused by
the bedroom door. She might like something tasty. Thin bread and butter
she likes in the morning. Still perhaps: once in a way.

He said softly in the bare hall:

--I'm going round the corner. Be back in a minute.

And when he had heard his voice say it he added:

--You don't want anything for breakfast?

A sleepy soft grunt answered:

--Mn.

No. She didn't want anything. He heard then a warm heavy sigh, softer,
as she turned over and the loose brass quoits of the bedstead jingled.
Must get those settled really. Pity. All the way from Gibraltar.
Forgotten any little Spanish she knew. Wonder what her father gave for
it. Old style. Ah yes! of course. Bought it at the governor's auction.
Got a short knock. Hard as nails at a bargain, old Tweedy. Yes, sir. At
Plevna that was. I rose from the ranks, sir, and I'm proud of it.
Still he had brains enough to make that corner in stamps. Now that was
farseeing.

His hand took his hat from the peg over his initialled heavy overcoat
and his lost property office secondhand waterproof. Stamps: stickyback
pictures. Daresay lots of officers are in the swim too. Course they do.
The sweated legend in the crown of his hat told him mutely: Plasto's
high grade ha. He peeped quickly inside the leather headband. White slip
of paper. Quite safe.

On the doorstep he felt in his hip pocket for the latchkey. Not there.
In the trousers I left off. Must get it. Potato I have. Creaky wardrobe.
No use disturbing her. She turned over sleepily that time. He pulled
the halldoor to after him very quietly, more, till the footleaf dropped
gently over the threshold, a limp lid. Looked shut. All right till I
come back anyhow.

He crossed to the bright side, avoiding the loose cellarflap of number
seventyfive. The sun was nearing the steeple of George's church. Be a
warm day I fancy. Specially in these black clothes feel it more. Black
conducts, reflects, (refracts is it?), the heat. But I couldn't go in
that light suit. Make a picnic of it. His eyelids sank quietly often as
he walked in happy warmth. Boland's breadvan delivering with trays our
daily but she prefers yesterday's loaves turnovers crisp crowns hot.
Makes you feel young. Somewhere in the east: early morning: set off at
dawn. Travel round in front of the sun, steal a day's march on him. Keep
it up for ever never grow a day older technically. Walk along a strand,
strange land, come to a city gate, sentry there, old ranker too, old
Tweedy's big moustaches, leaning on a long kind of a spear. Wander
through awned streets. Turbaned faces going by. Dark caves of carpet
shops, big man, Turko the terrible, seated crosslegged, smoking a coiled
pipe. Cries of sellers in the streets. Drink water scented with fennel,
sherbet. Dander along all day. Might meet a robber or two. Well,
meet him. Getting on to sundown. The shadows of the mosques among the
pillars: priest with a scroll rolled up. A shiver of the trees, signal,
the evening wind. I pass on. Fading gold sky. A mother watches me from
her doorway. She calls her children home in their dark language. High
wall: beyond strings twanged. Night sky, moon, violet, colour of Molly's
new garters. Strings. Listen. A girl playing one of those instruments
what do you call them: dulcimers. I pass.

Probably not a bit like it really. Kind of stuff you read: in the track
of the sun. Sunburst on the titlepage. He smiled, pleasing himself. What
Arthur Griffith said about the headpiece over the _Freeman_ leader: a
homerule sun rising up in the northwest from the laneway behind the bank
of Ireland. He prolonged his pleased smile. Ikey touch that: homerule
sun rising up in the north-west.

He approached Larry O'Rourke's. From the cellar grating floated up the
flabby gush of porter. Through the open doorway the bar squirted out
whiffs of ginger, teadust, biscuitmush. Good house, however: just the
end of the city traffic. For instance M'Auley's down there: n. g. as
position. Of course if they ran a tramline along the North Circular from
the cattlemarket to the quays value would go up like a shot.

Baldhead over the blind. Cute old codger. No use canvassing him for an
ad. Still he knows his own business best. There he is, sure enough, my
bold Larry, leaning against the sugarbin in his shirtsleeves watching
the aproned curate swab up with mop and bucket. Simon Dedalus takes him
off to a tee with his eyes screwed up. Do you know what I'm going to
tell you? What's that, Mr O'Rourke? Do you know what? The Russians,
they'd only be an eight o'clock breakfast for the Japanese.

Stop and say a word: about the funeral perhaps. Sad thing about poor
Dignam, Mr O'Rourke.

Turning into Dorset street he said freshly in greeting through the
doorway:

--Good day, Mr O'Rourke.

--Good day to you.

--Lovely weather, sir.

--'Tis all that.

Where do they get the money? Coming up redheaded curates from the county
Leitrim, rinsing empties and old man in the cellar. Then, lo and behold,
they blossom out as Adam Findlaters or Dan Tallons. Then thin of the
competition. General thirst. Good puzzle would be cross Dublin without
passing a pub. Save it they can't. Off the drunks perhaps. Put down
three and carry five. What is that, a bob here and there, dribs and
drabs. On the wholesale orders perhaps. Doing a double shuffle with the
town travellers. Square it you with the boss and we'll split the job,
see?

How much would that tot to off the porter in the month? Say ten barrels
of stuff. Say he got ten per cent off. O more. Fifteen. He passed Saint
Joseph's National school. Brats' clamour. Windows open. Fresh air
helps memory. Or a lilt. Ahbeesee defeegee kelomen opeecue rustyouvee
doubleyou. Boys are they? Yes. Inishturk. Inishark. Inishboffin. At
their joggerfry. Mine. Slieve Bloom.

He halted before Dlugacz's window, staring at the hanks of sausages,
polonies, black and white. Fifteen multiplied by. The figures whitened
in his mind, unsolved: displeased, he let them fade. The shiny links,
packed with forcemeat, fed his gaze and he breathed in tranquilly the
lukewarm breath of cooked spicy pigs' blood.

A kidney oozed bloodgouts on the willowpatterned dish: the last. He
stood by the nextdoor girl at the counter. Would she buy it too, calling
the items from a slip in her hand? Chapped: washingsoda. And a pound and
a half of Denny's sausages. His eyes rested on her vigorous hips.
Woods his name is. Wonder what he does. Wife is oldish. New blood.
No followers allowed. Strong pair of arms. Whacking a carpet on the
clothesline. She does whack it, by George. The way her crooked skirt
swings at each whack.

The ferreteyed porkbutcher folded the sausages he had snipped off with
blotchy fingers, sausagepink. Sound meat there: like a stallfed heifer.

He took a page up from the pile of cut sheets: the model farm at
Kinnereth on the lakeshore of Tiberias. Can become ideal winter
sanatorium. Moses Montefiore. I thought he was. Farmhouse, wall round
it, blurred cattle cropping. He held the page from him: interesting:
read it nearer, the title, the blurred cropping cattle, the page
rustling. A young white heifer. Those mornings in the cattlemarket, the
beasts lowing in their pens, branded sheep, flop and fall of dung, the
breeders in hobnailed boots trudging through the litter, slapping a palm
on a ripemeated hindquarter, there's a prime one, unpeeled switches in
their hands. He held the page aslant patiently, bending his senses and
his will, his soft subject gaze at rest. The crooked skirt swinging,
whack by whack by whack.

The porkbutcher snapped two sheets from the pile, wrapped up her prime
sausages and made a red grimace.

--Now, my miss, he said.

She tendered a coin, smiling boldly, holding her thick wrist out.

--Thank you, my miss. And one shilling threepence change. For you,
please?

Mr Bloom pointed quickly. To catch up and walk behind her if she went
slowly, behind her moving hams. Pleasant to see first thing in the
morning. Hurry up, damn it. Make hay while the sun shines. She stood
outside the shop in sunlight and sauntered lazily to the right. He
sighed down his nose: they never understand. Sodachapped hands. Crusted
toenails too. Brown scapulars in tatters, defending her both ways.
The sting of disregard glowed to weak pleasure within his breast. For
another: a constable off duty cuddling her in Eccles lane. They like
them sizeable. Prime sausage. O please, Mr Policeman, I'm lost in the
wood.

--Threepence, please.

His hand accepted the moist tender gland and slid it into a sidepocket.
Then it fetched up three coins from his trousers' pocket and laid them
on the rubber prickles. They lay, were read quickly and quickly slid,
disc by disc, into the till.

--Thank you, sir. Another time.

A speck of eager fire from foxeyes thanked him. He withdrew his gaze
after an instant. No: better not: another time.

--Good morning, he said, moving away.

--Good morning, sir.

No sign. Gone. What matter?

He walked back along Dorset street, reading gravely. Agendath Netaim:
planters' company. To purchase waste sandy tracts from Turkish
government and plant with eucalyptus trees. Excellent for shade, fuel
and construction. Orangegroves and immense melonfields north of Jaffa.
You pay eighty marks and they plant a dunam of land for you with olives,
oranges, almonds or citrons. Olives cheaper: oranges need artificial
irrigation. Every year you get a sending of the crop. Your name entered
for life as owner in the book of the union. Can pay ten down and the
balance in yearly instalments. Bleibtreustrasse 34, Berlin, W. 15.

Nothing doing. Still an idea behind it.

He looked at the cattle, blurred in silver heat. Silverpowdered
olivetrees. Quiet long days: pruning, ripening. Olives are packed in
jars, eh? I have a few left from Andrews. Molly spitting them out. Knows
the taste of them now. Oranges in tissue paper packed in crates. Citrons
too. Wonder is poor Citron still in Saint Kevin's parade. And Mastiansky
with the old cither. Pleasant evenings we had then. Molly in Citron's
basketchair. Nice to hold, cool waxen fruit, hold in the hand, lift it
to the nostrils and smell the perfume. Like that, heavy, sweet, wild
perfume. Always the same, year after year. They fetched high prices too,
Moisel told me. Arbutus place: Pleasants street: pleasant old times.
Must be without a flaw, he said. Coming all that way: Spain, Gibraltar,
Mediterranean, the Levant. Crates lined up on the quayside at Jaffa,
chap ticking them off in a book, navvies handling them barefoot in
soiled dungarees. There's whatdoyoucallhim out of. How do you? Doesn't
see. Chap you know just to salute bit of a bore. His back is like that
Norwegian captain's. Wonder if I'll meet him today. Watering cart. To
provoke the rain. On earth as it is in heaven.

A cloud began to cover the sun slowly, wholly. Grey. Far.

No, not like that. A barren land, bare waste. Vulcanic lake, the dead
sea: no fish, weedless, sunk deep in the earth. No wind could lift those
waves, grey metal, poisonous foggy waters. Brimstone they called it
raining down: the cities of the plain: Sodom, Gomorrah, Edom. All dead
names. A dead sea in a dead land, grey and old. Old now. It bore the
oldest, the first race. A bent hag crossed from Cassidy's, clutching a
naggin bottle by the neck. The oldest people. Wandered far away over
all the earth, captivity to captivity, multiplying, dying, being born
everywhere. It lay there now. Now it could bear no more. Dead: an old
woman's: the grey sunken cunt of the world.

Desolation.

Grey horror seared his flesh. Folding the page into his pocket he turned
into Eccles street, hurrying homeward. Cold oils slid along his veins,
chilling his blood: age crusting him with a salt cloak. Well, I am here
now. Yes, I am here now. Morning mouth bad images. Got up wrong side of
the bed. Must begin again those Sandow's exercises. On the hands down.
Blotchy brown brick houses. Number eighty still unlet. Why is that?
Valuation is only twenty-eight. Towers, Battersby, North, MacArthur:
parlour windows plastered with bills. Plasters on a sore eye. To smell
the gentle smoke of tea, fume of the pan, sizzling butter. Be near her
ample bedwarmed flesh. Yes, yes.

Quick warm sunlight came running from Berkeley road, swiftly, in slim
sandals, along the brightening footpath. Runs, she runs to meet me, a
girl with gold hair on the wind.

Two letters and a card lay on the hallfloor. He stooped and gathered
them. Mrs Marion Bloom. His quickened heart slowed at once. Bold hand.
Mrs Marion.

--Poldy!

Entering the bedroom he halfclosed his eyes and walked through warm
yellow twilight towards her tousled head.

--Who are the letters for?

He looked at them. Mullingar. Milly.

--A letter for me from Milly, he said carefully, and a card to you. And
a letter for you.

He laid her card and letter on the twill bedspread near the curve of her
knees.

--Do you want the blind up?

Letting the blind up by gentle tugs halfway his backward eye saw her
glance at the letter and tuck it under her pillow.

--That do? he asked, turning.

She was reading the card, propped on her elbow.

--She got the things, she said.

He waited till she had laid the card aside and curled herself back
slowly with a snug sigh.

--Hurry up with that tea, she said. I'm parched.

--The kettle is boiling, he said.

But he delayed to clear the chair: her striped petticoat, tossed soiled
linen: and lifted all in an armful on to the foot of the bed.

As he went down the kitchen stairs she called:

--Poldy!

--What?

--Scald the teapot.

On the boil sure enough: a plume of steam from the spout. He scalded and
rinsed out the teapot and put in four full spoons of tea, tilting the
kettle then to let the water flow in. Having set it to draw he took off
the kettle, crushed the pan flat on the live coals and watched the lump
of butter slide and melt. While he unwrapped the kidney the cat mewed
hungrily against him. Give her too much meat she won't mouse. Say they
won't eat pork. Kosher. Here. He let the bloodsmeared paper fall to
her and dropped the kidney amid the sizzling butter sauce. Pepper. He
sprinkled it through his fingers ringwise from the chipped eggcup.

Then he slit open his letter, glancing down the page and over. Thanks:
new tam: Mr Coghlan: lough Owel picnic: young student: Blazes Boylan's
seaside girls.

The tea was drawn. He filled his own moustachecup, sham crown

Derby, smiling. Silly Milly's birthday gift. Only five she was then. No,
wait: four. I gave her the amberoid necklace she broke. Putting pieces
of folded brown paper in the letterbox for her. He smiled, pouring.

     _O, Milly Bloom, you are my darling.
     You are my lookingglass from night to morning.
     I'd rather have you without a farthing
     Than Katey Keogh with her ass and garden._


Poor old professor Goodwin. Dreadful old case. Still he was a courteous
old chap. Oldfashioned way he used to bow Molly off the platform. And
the little mirror in his silk hat. The night Milly brought it into
the parlour. O, look what I found in professor Goodwin's hat! All we
laughed. Sex breaking out even then. Pert little piece she was.

He prodded a fork into the kidney and slapped it over: then fitted the
teapot on the tray. Its hump bumped as he took it up. Everything on
it? Bread and butter, four, sugar, spoon, her cream. Yes. He carried it
upstairs, his thumb hooked in the teapot handle.

Nudging the door open with his knee he carried the tray in and set it on
the chair by the bedhead.

--What a time you were! she said.

She set the brasses jingling as she raised herself briskly, an elbow on
the pillow. He looked calmly down on her bulk and between her large soft
bubs, sloping within her nightdress like a shegoat's udder. The warmth
of her couched body rose on the air, mingling with the fragrance of the
tea she poured.

A strip of torn envelope peeped from under the dimpled pillow. In the
act of going he stayed to straighten the bedspread.

--Who was the letter from? he asked.

Bold hand. Marion.

--O, Boylan, she said. He's bringing the programme.

--What are you singing?

--_La ci darem_ with J. C. Doyle, she said, and _Love's Old Sweet Song_.

Her full lips, drinking, smiled. Rather stale smell that incense leaves
next day. Like foul flowerwater.

--Would you like the window open a little?

She doubled a slice of bread into her mouth, asking:

--What time is the funeral?

--Eleven, I think, he answered. I didn't see the paper.

Following the pointing of her finger he took up a leg of her soiled
drawers from the bed. No? Then, a twisted grey garter looped round a
stocking: rumpled, shiny sole.

--No: that book.

Other stocking. Her petticoat.

--It must have fell down, she said.

He felt here and there. _Voglio e non vorrei_. Wonder if she pronounces
that right: _voglio_. Not in the bed. Must have slid down. He stooped
and lifted the valance. The book, fallen, sprawled against the bulge of
the orangekeyed chamberpot.

--Show here, she said. I put a mark in it. There's a word I wanted to
ask you.

She swallowed a draught of tea from her cup held by nothandle and,
having wiped her fingertips smartly on the blanket, began to search the
text with the hairpin till she reached the word.

--Met him what? he asked.

--Here, she said. What does that mean?

He leaned downward and read near her polished thumbnail.

--Metempsychosis?

--Yes. Who's he when he's at home?

--Metempsychosis, he said, frowning. It's Greek: from the Greek. That
means the transmigration of souls.

--O, rocks! she said. Tell us in plain words.

He smiled, glancing askance at her mocking eyes. The same young eyes.
The first night after the charades. Dolphin's Barn. He turned over
the smudged pages. _Ruby: the Pride of the Ring_. Hello. Illustration.
Fierce Italian with carriagewhip. Must be Ruby pride of the on the floor
naked. Sheet kindly lent. _The monster Maffei desisted and flung his
victim from him with an oath_. Cruelty behind it all. Doped animals.
Trapeze at Hengler's. Had to look the other way. Mob gaping. Break your
neck and we'll break our sides. Families of them. Bone them young so
they metamspychosis. That we live after death. Our souls. That a man's
soul after he dies. Dignam's soul...

--Did you finish it? he asked.

--Yes, she said. There's nothing smutty in it. Is she in love with the
first fellow all the time?

--Never read it. Do you want another?

--Yes. Get another of Paul de Kock's. Nice name he has.

She poured more tea into her cup, watching it flow sideways.

Must get that Capel street library book renewed or they'll write to
Kearney, my guarantor. Reincarnation: that's the word.

--Some people believe, he said, that we go on living in another body
after death, that we lived before. They call it reincarnation. That
we all lived before on the earth thousands of years ago or some other
planet. They say we have forgotten it. Some say they remember their past
lives.

The sluggish cream wound curdling spirals through her tea. Better remind
her of the word: metempsychosis. An example would be better. An example?

The _Bath of the Nymph_ over the bed. Given away with the Easter number
of _Photo Bits_: Splendid masterpiece in art colours. Tea before you
put milk in. Not unlike her with her hair down: slimmer. Three and six
I gave for the frame. She said it would look nice over the bed. Naked
nymphs: Greece: and for instance all the people that lived then.

He turned the pages back.

--Metempsychosis, he said, is what the ancient Greeks called it. They
used to believe you could be changed into an animal or a tree, for
instance. What they called nymphs, for example.

Her spoon ceased to stir up the sugar. She gazed straight before her,
inhaling through her arched nostrils.

--There's a smell of burn, she said. Did you leave anything on the fire?

--The kidney! he cried suddenly.

He fitted the book roughly into his inner pocket and, stubbing his toes
against the broken commode, hurried out towards the smell, stepping
hastily down the stairs with a flurried stork's legs. Pungent smoke shot
up in an angry jet from a side of the pan. By prodding a prong of the
fork under the kidney he detached it and turned it turtle on its back.
Only a little burnt. He tossed it off the pan on to a plate and let the
scanty brown gravy trickle over it.

Cup of tea now. He sat down, cut and buttered a slice of the loaf.
He shore away the burnt flesh and flung it to the cat. Then he put a
forkful into his mouth, chewing with discernment the toothsome pliant
meat. Done to a turn. A mouthful of tea. Then he cut away dies of bread,
sopped one in the gravy and put it in his mouth. What was that about
some young student and a picnic? He creased out the letter at his side,
reading it slowly as he chewed, sopping another die of bread in the
gravy and raising it to his mouth.

Dearest Papli

Thanks ever so much for the lovely birthday present. It suits me
splendid. Everyone says I am quite the belle in my new tam. I got
mummy's Iovely box of creams and am writing. They are lovely. I am
getting on swimming in the photo business now. Mr Coghlan took one of me
and Mrs. Will send when developed. We did great biz yesterday. Fair day
and all the beef to the heels were in. We are going to lough Owel on
Monday with a few friends to make a scrap picnic. Give my love to
mummy and to yourself a big kiss and thanks. I hear them at the piano
downstairs. There is to be a concert in the Greville Arms on Saturday.
There is a young student comes here some evenings named Bannon his
cousins or something are big swells and he sings Boylan's (I was on the
pop of writing Blazes Boylan's) song about those seaside girls. Tell him
silly Milly sends my best respects. I must now close with fondest love

Your fond daughter, MILLY.

P. S. Excuse bad writing am in hurry. Byby. M.

Fifteen yesterday. Curious, fifteenth of the month too. Her first
birthday away from home. Separation. Remember the summer morning she
was born, running to knock up Mrs Thornton in Denzille street. Jolly old
woman. Lot of babies she must have helped into the world. She knew from
the first poor little Rudy wouldn't live. Well, God is good, sir. She
knew at once. He would be eleven now if he had lived.

His vacant face stared pityingly at the postscript. Excuse bad writing.
Hurry. Piano downstairs. Coming out of her shell. Row with her in the
XL Cafe about the bracelet. Wouldn't eat her cakes or speak or look.
Saucebox. He sopped other dies of bread in the gravy and ate piece after
piece of kidney. Twelve and six a week. Not much. Still, she might do
worse. Music hall stage. Young student. He drank a draught of cooler tea
to wash down his meal. Then he read the letter again: twice.

O, well: she knows how to mind herself. But if not? No, nothing has
happened. Of course it might. Wait in any case till it does. A wild
piece of goods. Her slim legs running up the staircase. Destiny.
Ripening now.

Vain: very.

He smiled with troubled affection at the kitchen window. Day I caught
her in the street pinching her cheeks to make them red. Anemic a little.
Was given milk too long. On the ERIN'S KING that day round the Kish.
Damned old tub pitching about. Not a bit funky. Her pale blue scarf
loose in the wind with her hair. _All dimpled cheeks and curls, Your
head it simply swirls._


Seaside girls. Torn envelope. Hands stuck in his trousers' pockets,
jarvey off for the day, singing. Friend of the family. Swurls, he says.
Pier with lamps, summer evening, band,

     _Those girls, those girls,
     Those lovely seaside girls._


Milly too. Young kisses: the first. Far away now past. Mrs Marion.
Reading, lying back now, counting the strands of her hair, smiling,
braiding.

A soft qualm, regret, flowed down his backbone, increasing. Will happen,
yes. Prevent. Useless: can't move. Girl's sweet light lips. Will happen
too. He felt the flowing qualm spread over him. Useless to move now.
Lips kissed, kissing, kissed. Full gluey woman's lips.

Better where she is down there: away. Occupy her. Wanted a dog to pass
the time. Might take a trip down there. August bank holiday, only two
and six return. Six weeks off, however. Might work a press pass. Or
through M'Coy.

The cat, having cleaned all her fur, returned to the meatstained paper,
nosed at it and stalked to the door. She looked back at him, mewing.
Wants to go out. Wait before a door sometime it will open. Let her wait.
Has the fidgets. Electric. Thunder in the air. Was washing at her ear
with her back to the fire too.

He felt heavy, full: then a gentle loosening of his bowels. He stood up,
undoing the waistband of his trousers. The cat mewed to him.

--Miaow! he said in answer. Wait till I'm ready.

Heaviness: hot day coming. Too much trouble to fag up the stairs to the
landing.

A paper. He liked to read at stool. Hope no ape comes knocking just as
I'm.

In the tabledrawer he found an old number of _Titbits_. He folded it
under his armpit, went to the door and opened it. The cat went up in
soft bounds. Ah, wanted to go upstairs, curl up in a ball on the bed.

Listening, he heard her voice:

--Come, come, pussy. Come.

He went out through the backdoor into the garden: stood to listen
towards the next garden. No sound. Perhaps hanging clothes out to dry.
The maid was in the garden. Fine morning.

He bent down to regard a lean file of spearmint growing by the wall.
Make a summerhouse here. Scarlet runners. Virginia creepers. Want to
manure the whole place over, scabby soil. A coat of liver of sulphur.
All soil like that without dung. Household slops. Loam, what is this
that is? The hens in the next garden: their droppings are very good top
dressing. Best of all though are the cattle, especially when they are
fed on those oilcakes. Mulch of dung. Best thing to clean ladies' kid
gloves. Dirty cleans. Ashes too. Reclaim the whole place. Grow peas in
that corner there. Lettuce. Always have fresh greens then. Still gardens
have their drawbacks. That bee or bluebottle here Whitmonday.

He walked on. Where is my hat, by the way? Must have put it back on the
peg. Or hanging up on the floor. Funny I don't remember that. Hallstand
too full. Four umbrellas, her raincloak. Picking up the letters.
Drago's shopbell ringing. Queer I was just thinking that moment. Brown
brillantined hair over his collar. Just had a wash and brushup. Wonder
have I time for a bath this morning. Tara street. Chap in the paybox
there got away James Stephens, they say. O'Brien.

Deep voice that fellow Dlugacz has. Agendath what is it? Now, my miss.
Enthusiast.

He kicked open the crazy door of the jakes. Better be careful not to get
these trousers dirty for the funeral. He went in, bowing his head
under the low lintel. Leaving the door ajar, amid the stench of mouldy
limewash and stale cobwebs he undid his braces. Before sitting down he
peered through a chink up at the nextdoor windows. The king was in his
countinghouse. Nobody.

Asquat on the cuckstool he folded out his paper, turning its pages over
on his bared knees. Something new and easy. No great hurry. Keep it a
bit. Our prize titbit: _Matcham's Masterstroke_. Written by Mr Philip
Beaufoy, Playgoers' Club, London. Payment at the rate of one guinea
a column has been made to the writer. Three and a half. Three pounds
three. Three pounds, thirteen and six.

Quietly he read, restraining himself, the first column and, yielding but
resisting, began the second. Midway, his last resistance yielding, he
allowed his bowels to ease themselves quietly as he read, reading still
patiently that slight constipation of yesterday quite gone. Hope it's
not too big bring on piles again. No, just right. So. Ah! Costive. One
tabloid of cascara sagrada. Life might be so. It did not move or touch
him but it was something quick and neat. Print anything now. Silly
season. He read on, seated calm above his own rising smell. Neat
certainly. _Matcham often thinks of the masterstroke by which he won the
laughing witch who now_. Begins and ends morally. _Hand in hand_. Smart.
He glanced back through what he had read and, while feeling his water
flow quietly, he envied kindly Mr Beaufoy who had written it and
received payment of three pounds, thirteen and six.

Might manage a sketch. By Mr and Mrs L. M. Bloom. Invent a story for
some proverb. Which? Time I used to try jotting down on my cuff what she
said dressing. Dislike dressing together. Nicked myself shaving. Biting
her nether lip, hooking the placket of her skirt. Timing her. 9.l5.
Did Roberts pay you yet? 9.20. What had Gretta Conroy on? 9.23. What
possessed me to buy this comb? 9.24. I'm swelled after that cabbage. A
speck of dust on the patent leather of her boot.

Rubbing smartly in turn each welt against her stockinged calf. Morning
after the bazaar dance when May's band played Ponchielli's dance of the
hours. Explain that: morning hours, noon, then evening coming on, then
night hours. Washing her teeth. That was the first night. Her head
dancing. Her fansticks clicking. Is that Boylan well off? He has money.
Why? I noticed he had a good rich smell off his breath dancing. No use
humming then. Allude to it. Strange kind of music that last night. The
mirror was in shadow. She rubbed her handglass briskly on her woollen
vest against her full wagging bub. Peering into it. Lines in her eyes.
It wouldn't pan out somehow.

Evening hours, girls in grey gauze. Night hours then: black with daggers
and eyemasks. Poetical idea: pink, then golden, then grey, then black.
Still, true to life also. Day: then the night.

He tore away half the prize story sharply and wiped himself with it.
Then he girded up his trousers, braced and buttoned himself. He pulled
back the jerky shaky door of the jakes and came forth from the gloom
into the air.

In the bright light, lightened and cooled in limb, he eyed carefully his
black trousers: the ends, the knees, the houghs of the knees. What time
is the funeral? Better find out in the paper.

A creak and a dark whirr in the air high up. The bells of George's
church. They tolled the hour: loud dark iron.

     _Heigho! Heigho!
     Heigho! Heigho!
     Heigho! Heigho!_


Quarter to. There again: the overtone following through the air, third.

Poor Dignam!


By lorries along sir John Rogerson's quay Mr Bloom walked soberly, past
Windmill lane, Leask's the linseed crusher, the postal telegraph office.
Could have given that address too. And past the sailors' home. He turned
from the morning noises of the quayside and walked through Lime street.
By Brady's cottages a boy for the skins lolled, his bucket of offal
linked, smoking a chewed fagbutt. A smaller girl with scars of eczema
on her forehead eyed him, listlessly holding her battered caskhoop. Tell
him if he smokes he won't grow. O let him! His life isn't such a bed of
roses. Waiting outside pubs to bring da home. Come home to ma, da.
Slack hour: won't be many there. He crossed Townsend street, passed
the frowning face of Bethel. El, yes: house of: Aleph, Beth. And past
Nichols' the undertaker. At eleven it is. Time enough. Daresay Corny
Kelleher bagged the job for O'Neill's. Singing with his eyes shut.
Corny. Met her once in the park. In the dark. What a lark. Police tout.
Her name and address she then told with my tooraloom tooraloom tay.
O, surely he bagged it. Bury him cheap in a whatyoumaycall. With my
tooraloom, tooraloom, tooraloom, tooraloom.


In Westland row he halted before the window of the Belfast and Oriental
Tea Company and read the legends of leadpapered packets: choice blend,
finest quality, family tea. Rather warm. Tea. Must get some from Tom
Kernan. Couldn't ask him at a funeral, though. While his eyes still read
blandly he took off his hat quietly inhaling his hairoil and sent his
right hand with slow grace over his brow and hair. Very warm morning.
Under their dropped lids his eyes found the tiny bow of the leather
headband inside his high grade ha. Just there. His right hand came down
into the bowl of his hat. His fingers found quickly a card behind the
headband and transferred it to his waistcoat pocket.

So warm. His right hand once more more slowly went over his brow and
hair. Then he put on his hat again, relieved: and read again: choice
blend, made of the finest Ceylon brands. The far east. Lovely spot it
must be: the garden of the world, big lazy leaves to float about on,
cactuses, flowery meads, snaky lianas they call them. Wonder is it like
that. Those Cinghalese lobbing about in the sun in _dolce far niente_,
not doing a hand's turn all day. Sleep six months out of twelve. Too hot
to quarrel. Influence of the climate. Lethargy. Flowers of idleness. The
air feeds most. Azotes. Hothouse in Botanic gardens. Sensitive plants.
Waterlilies. Petals too tired to. Sleeping sickness in the air. Walk on
roseleaves. Imagine trying to eat tripe and cowheel. Where was the chap
I saw in that picture somewhere? Ah yes, in the dead sea floating on his
back, reading a book with a parasol open. Couldn't sink if you tried: so
thick with salt. Because the weight of the water, no, the weight of
the body in the water is equal to the weight of the what? Or is it the
volume is equal to the weight? It's a law something like that. Vance in
High school cracking his fingerjoints, teaching. The college curriculum.
Cracking curriculum. What is weight really when you say the weight?
Thirtytwo feet per second per second. Law of falling bodies: per second
per second. They all fall to the ground. The earth. It's the force of
gravity of the earth is the weight.

He turned away and sauntered across the road. How did she walk with her
sausages? Like that something. As he walked he took the folded _Freeman_
from his sidepocket, unfolded it, rolled it lengthwise in a baton and
tapped it at each sauntering step against his trouserleg. Careless air:
just drop in to see. Per second per second. Per second for every second
it means. From the curbstone he darted a keen glance through the door of
the postoffice. Too late box. Post here. No-one. In.

He handed the card through the brass grill.

--Are there any letters for me? he asked.

While the postmistress searched a pigeonhole he gazed at the recruiting
poster with soldiers of all arms on parade: and held the tip of his
baton against his nostrils, smelling freshprinted rag paper. No answer
probably. Went too far last time.

The postmistress handed him back through the grill his card with a
letter. He thanked her and glanced rapidly at the typed envelope.

Henry Flower Esq, c/o P. O. Westland Row, City.

Answered anyhow. He slipped card and letter into his sidepocket,
reviewing again the soldiers on parade. Where's old Tweedy's regiment?
Castoff soldier. There: bearskin cap and hackle plume. No, he's a
grenadier. Pointed cuffs. There he is: royal Dublin fusiliers. Redcoats.
Too showy. That must be why the women go after them. Uniform. Easier to
enlist and drill. Maud Gonne's letter about taking them off O'Connell
street at night: disgrace to our Irish capital. Griffith's paper is on
the same tack now: an army rotten with venereal disease: overseas or
halfseasover empire. Half baked they look: hypnotised like. Eyes front.
Mark time. Table: able. Bed: ed. The King's own. Never see him dressed
up as a fireman or a bobby. A mason, yes.

He strolled out of the postoffice and turned to the right. Talk: as if
that would mend matters. His hand went into his pocket and a forefinger
felt its way under the flap of the envelope, ripping it open in jerks.
Women will pay a lot of heed, I don't think. His fingers drew forth the
letter the letter and crumpled the envelope in his pocket. Something
pinned on: photo perhaps. Hair? No.

M'Coy. Get rid of him quickly. Take me out of my way. Hate company when
you.

--Hello, Bloom. Where are you off to?

--Hello, M'Coy. Nowhere in particular.

--How's the body?

--Fine. How are you?

--Just keeping alive, M'Coy said.

His eyes on the black tie and clothes he asked with low respect:

--Is there any... no trouble I hope? I see you're...

--O, no, Mr Bloom said. Poor Dignam, you know. The funeral is today.

--To be sure, poor fellow. So it is. What time?

A photo it isn't. A badge maybe.

--E... eleven, Mr Bloom answered.

--I must try to get out there, M'Coy said. Eleven, is it? I only heard
it last night. Who was telling me? Holohan. You know Hoppy?

--I know.

Mr Bloom gazed across the road at the outsider drawn up before the door
of the Grosvenor. The porter hoisted the valise up on the well. She
stood still, waiting, while the man, husband, brother, like her,
searched his pockets for change. Stylish kind of coat with that roll
collar, warm for a day like this, looks like blanketcloth. Careless
stand of her with her hands in those patch pockets. Like that haughty
creature at the polo match. Women all for caste till you touch the spot.
Handsome is and handsome does. Reserved about to yield. The honourable
Mrs and Brutus is an honourable man. Possess her once take the starch
out of her.

--I was with Bob Doran, he's on one of his periodical bends, and what do
you call him Bantam Lyons. Just down there in Conway's we were.

Doran Lyons in Conway's. She raised a gloved hand to her hair. In came
Hoppy. Having a wet. Drawing back his head and gazing far from beneath
his vailed eyelids he saw the bright fawn skin shine in the glare, the
braided drums. Clearly I can see today. Moisture about gives long sight
perhaps. Talking of one thing or another. Lady's hand. Which side will
she get up?

--And he said: _Sad thing about our poor friend Paddy! What Paddy?_ I
said. _Poor little Paddy Dignam_, he said.

Off to the country: Broadstone probably. High brown boots with laces
dangling. Wellturned foot. What is he foostering over that change for?
Sees me looking. Eye out for other fellow always. Good fallback. Two
strings to her bow.

--_Why?_ I said. _What's wrong with him?_ I said.

Proud: rich: silk stockings.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said.

He moved a little to the side of M'Coy's talking head. Getting up in a
minute.

--_What's wrong with him_? He said. _He's dead_, he said. And, faith,
he filled up. _Is it Paddy Dignam_? I said. I couldn't believe it when I
heard it. I was with him no later than Friday last or Thursday was it in
the Arch. _Yes,_ he said. _He's gone. He died on Monday, poor fellow_.
Watch! Watch! Silk flash rich stockings white. Watch!

A heavy tramcar honking its gong slewed between.

Lost it. Curse your noisy pugnose. Feels locked out of it. Paradise and
the peri. Always happening like that. The very moment. Girl in Eustace
street hallway Monday was it settling her garter. Her friend covering
the display of _esprit de corps_. Well, what are you gaping at?

--Yes, yes, Mr Bloom said after a dull sigh. Another gone.

--One of the best, M'Coy said.

The tram passed. They drove off towards the Loop Line bridge, her rich
gloved hand on the steel grip. Flicker, flicker: the laceflare of her
hat in the sun: flicker, flick.

--Wife well, I suppose? M'Coy's changed voice said.

--O, yes, Mr Bloom said. Tiptop, thanks.

He unrolled the newspaper baton idly and read idly:

_What is home without Plumtree's Potted Meat? Incomplete With it an
abode of bliss._

--My missus has just got an engagement. At least it's not settled yet.

Valise tack again. By the way no harm. I'm off that, thanks.

Mr Bloom turned his largelidded eyes with unhasty friendliness.

--My wife too, he said. She's going to sing at a swagger affair in the
Ulster Hall, Belfast, on the twenty-fifth.

--That so? M'Coy said. Glad to hear that, old man. Who's getting it up?

Mrs Marion Bloom. Not up yet. Queen was in her bedroom eating bread and.
No book. Blackened court cards laid along her thigh by sevens. Dark lady
and fair man. Letter. Cat furry black ball. Torn strip of envelope.

     _Love's
     Old
     Sweet
     Song
     Comes lo-ove's old..._

--It's a kind of a tour, don't you see, Mr Bloom said thoughtfully.
_Sweeeet song_. There's a committee formed. Part shares and part
profits.

M'Coy nodded, picking at his moustache stubble.

--O, well, he said. That's good news.

He moved to go.

--Well, glad to see you looking fit, he said. Meet you knocking around.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said.

--Tell you what, M'Coy said. You might put down my name at the funeral,
will you? I'd like to go but I mightn't be able, you see. There's a
drowning case at Sandycove may turn up and then the coroner and myself
would have to go down if the body is found. You just shove in my name if
I'm not there, will you?

--I'll do that, Mr Bloom said, moving to get off. That'll be all right.

--Right, M'Coy said brightly. Thanks, old man. I'd go if I possibly
could. Well, tolloll. Just C. P. M'Coy will do.

--That will be done, Mr Bloom answered firmly.

Didn't catch me napping that wheeze. The quick touch. Soft mark. I'd
like my job. Valise I have a particular fancy for. Leather. Capped
corners, rivetted edges, double action lever lock. Bob Cowley lent him
his for the Wicklow regatta concert last year and never heard tidings of
it from that good day to this.

Mr Bloom, strolling towards Brunswick street, smiled. My missus has just
got an. Reedy freckled soprano. Cheeseparing nose. Nice enough in its
way: for a little ballad. No guts in it. You and me, don't you know:
in the same boat. Softsoaping. Give you the needle that would. Can't
he hear the difference? Think he's that way inclined a bit. Against
my grain somehow. Thought that Belfast would fetch him. I hope that
smallpox up there doesn't get worse. Suppose she wouldn't let herself be
vaccinated again. Your wife and my wife.

Wonder is he pimping after me?

Mr Bloom stood at the corner, his eyes wandering over the multicoloured
hoardings. Cantrell and Cochrane's Ginger Ale (Aromatic). Clery's Summer
Sale. No, he's going on straight. Hello. _Leah_ tonight. Mrs Bandmann
Palmer. Like to see her again in that. _Hamlet_ she played last night.
Male impersonator. Perhaps he was a woman. Why Ophelia committed
suicide. Poor papa! How he used to talk of Kate Bateman in that. Outside
the Adelphi in London waited all the afternoon to get in. Year before
I was born that was: sixtyfive. And Ristori in Vienna. What is this the
right name is? By Mosenthal it is. Rachel, is it? No. The scene he was
always talking about where the old blind Abraham recognises the voice
and puts his fingers on his face.

Nathan's voice! His son's voice! I hear the voice of Nathan who left his
father to die of grief and misery in my arms, who left the house of his
father and left the God of his father.

Every word is so deep, Leopold.

Poor papa! Poor man! I'm glad I didn't go into the room to look at his
face. That day! O, dear! O, dear! Ffoo! Well, perhaps it was best for
him.

Mr Bloom went round the corner and passed the drooping nags of the
hazard. No use thinking of it any more. Nosebag time. Wish I hadn't met
that M'Coy fellow.

He came nearer and heard a crunching of gilded oats, the gently champing
teeth. Their full buck eyes regarded him as he went by, amid the sweet
oaten reek of horsepiss. Their Eldorado. Poor jugginses! Damn all they
know or care about anything with their long noses stuck in nosebags.
Too full for words. Still they get their feed all right and their doss.
Gelded too: a stump of black guttapercha wagging limp between their
haunches. Might be happy all the same that way. Good poor brutes they
look. Still their neigh can be very irritating.

He drew the letter from his pocket and folded it into the newspaper he
carried. Might just walk into her here. The lane is safer.

He passed the cabman's shelter. Curious the life of drifting cabbies.
All weathers, all places, time or setdown, no will of their own. _Voglio
e non_. Like to give them an odd cigarette. Sociable. Shout a few flying
syllables as they pass. He hummed:

     _La ci darem la mano
     La la lala la la._

He turned into Cumberland street and, going on some paces, halted in the
lee of the station wall. No-one. Meade's timberyard. Piled balks. Ruins
and tenements. With careful tread he passed over a hopscotch court with
its forgotten pickeystone. Not a sinner. Near the timberyard a squatted
child at marbles, alone, shooting the taw with a cunnythumb. A wise
tabby, a blinking sphinx, watched from her warm sill. Pity to disturb
them. Mohammed cut a piece out of his mantle not to wake her. Open it.
And once I played marbles when I went to that old dame's school. She
liked mignonette. Mrs Ellis's. And Mr? He opened the letter within the
newspaper.

A flower. I think it's a. A yellow flower with flattened petals. Not
annoyed then? What does she say?

Dear Henry

I got your last letter to me and thank you very much for it. I am sorry
you did not like my last letter. Why did you enclose the stamps? I am
awfully angry with you. I do wish I could punish you for that. I called
you naughty boy because I do not like that other world. Please tell me
what is the real meaning of that word? Are you not happy in your home
you poor little naughty boy? I do wish I could do something for you.
Please tell me what you think of poor me. I often think of the beautiful
name you have. Dear Henry, when will we meet? I think of you so often
you have no idea. I have never felt myself so much drawn to a man as
you. I feel so bad about. Please write me a long letter and tell me
more. Remember if you do not I will punish you. So now you know what I
will do to you, you naughty boy, if you do not wrote. O how I long to
meet you. Henry dear, do not deny my request before my patience are
exhausted. Then I will tell you all. Goodbye now, naughty darling, I
have such a bad headache. today. and write _by return_ to your longing

Martha

P. S. Do tell me what kind of perfume does your wife use. I want to
know.

He tore the flower gravely from its pinhold smelt its almost no smell
and placed it in his heart pocket. Language of flowers. They like it
because no-one can hear. Or a poison bouquet to strike him down. Then
walking slowly forward he read the letter again, murmuring here and
there a word. Angry tulips with you darling manflower punish your cactus
if you don't please poor forgetmenot how I long violets to dear roses
when we soon anemone meet all naughty nightstalk wife Martha's perfume.
Having read it all he took it from the newspaper and put it back in his
sidepocket.

Weak joy opened his lips. Changed since the first letter. Wonder did she
wrote it herself. Doing the indignant: a girl of good family like me,
respectable character. Could meet one Sunday after the rosary. Thank
you: not having any. Usual love scrimmage. Then running round corners.
Bad as a row with Molly. Cigar has a cooling effect. Narcotic. Go
further next time. Naughty boy: punish: afraid of words, of course.
Brutal, why not? Try it anyhow. A bit at a time.

Fingering still the letter in his pocket he drew the pin out of it.
Common pin, eh? He threw it on the road. Out of her clothes somewhere:
pinned together. Queer the number of pins they always have. No roses
without thorns.

Flat Dublin voices bawled in his head. Those two sluts that night in the
Coombe, linked together in the rain.

     _O, Mary lost the pin of her drawers.
     She didn't know what to do
     To keep it up
     To keep it up._

It? Them. Such a bad headache. Has her roses probably. Or sitting all
day typing. Eyefocus bad for stomach nerves. What perfume does your wife
use. Now could you make out a thing like that?

     _To keep it up._

Martha, Mary. I saw that picture somewhere I forget now old master or
faked for money. He is sitting in their house, talking. Mysterious. Also
the two sluts in the Coombe would listen.

     _To keep it up._

Nice kind of evening feeling. No more wandering about. Just loll there:
quiet dusk: let everything rip. Forget. Tell about places you have been,
strange customs. The other one, jar on her head, was getting the supper:
fruit, olives, lovely cool water out of a well, stonecold like the hole
in the wall at Ashtown. Must carry a paper goblet next time I go to the
trottingmatches. She listens with big dark soft eyes. Tell her: more and
more: all. Then a sigh: silence. Long long long rest.

Going under the railway arch he took out the envelope, tore it swiftly
in shreds and scattered them towards the road. The shreds fluttered
away, sank in the dank air: a white flutter, then all sank.

Henry Flower. You could tear up a cheque for a hundred pounds in the
same way. Simple bit of paper. Lord Iveagh once cashed a sevenfigure
cheque for a million in the bank of Ireland. Shows you the money to be
made out of porter. Still the other brother lord Ardilaun has to change
his shirt four times a day, they say. Skin breeds lice or vermin. A
million pounds, wait a moment. Twopence a pint, fourpence a quart,
eightpence a gallon of porter, no, one and fourpence a gallon of porter.
One and four into twenty: fifteen about. Yes, exactly. Fifteen millions
of barrels of porter.

What am I saying barrels? Gallons. About a million barrels all the same.

An incoming train clanked heavily above his head, coach after coach.
Barrels bumped in his head: dull porter slopped and churned inside.
The bungholes sprang open and a huge dull flood leaked out, flowing
together, winding through mudflats all over the level land, a lazy
pooling swirl of liquor bearing along wideleaved flowers of its froth.

He had reached the open backdoor of All Hallows. Stepping into the porch
he doffed his hat, took the card from his pocket and tucked it again
behind the leather headband. Damn it. I might have tried to work M'Coy
for a pass to Mullingar.

Same notice on the door. Sermon by the very reverend John Conmee S.J.
on saint Peter Claver S.J. and the African Mission. Prayers for the
conversion of Gladstone they had too when he was almost unconscious. The
protestants are the same. Convert Dr William J. Walsh D.D. to the true
religion. Save China's millions. Wonder how they explain it to the
heathen Chinee. Prefer an ounce of opium. Celestials. Rank heresy for
them. Buddha their god lying on his side in the museum. Taking it easy
with hand under his cheek. Josssticks burning. Not like Ecce Homo. Crown
of thorns and cross. Clever idea Saint Patrick the shamrock. Chopsticks?
Conmee: Martin Cunningham knows him: distinguishedlooking. Sorry I
didn't work him about getting Molly into the choir instead of that
Father Farley who looked a fool but wasn't. They're taught that. He's
not going out in bluey specs with the sweat rolling off him to baptise
blacks, is he? The glasses would take their fancy, flashing. Like to see
them sitting round in a ring with blub lips, entranced, listening. Still
life. Lap it up like milk, I suppose.

The cold smell of sacred stone called him. He trod the worn steps,
pushed the swingdoor and entered softly by the rere.

Something going on: some sodality. Pity so empty. Nice discreet place
to be next some girl. Who is my neighbour? Jammed by the hour to slow
music. That woman at midnight mass. Seventh heaven. Women knelt in the
benches with crimson halters round their necks, heads bowed. A batch
knelt at the altarrails. The priest went along by them, murmuring,
holding the thing in his hands. He stopped at each, took out a
communion, shook a drop or two (are they in water?) off it and put it
neatly into her mouth. Her hat and head sank. Then the next one. Her hat
sank at once. Then the next one: a small old woman. The priest bent down
to put it into her mouth, murmuring all the time. Latin. The next one.
Shut your eyes and open your mouth. What? _Corpus:_ body. Corpse. Good
idea the Latin. Stupefies them first. Hospice for the dying. They
don't seem to chew it: only swallow it down. Rum idea: eating bits of a
corpse. Why the cannibals cotton to it.

He stood aside watching their blind masks pass down the aisle, one by
one, and seek their places. He approached a bench and seated himself in
its corner, nursing his hat and newspaper. These pots we have to wear.
We ought to have hats modelled on our heads. They were about him here
and there, with heads still bowed in their crimson halters, waiting for
it to melt in their stomachs. Something like those mazzoth: it's that
sort of bread: unleavened shewbread. Look at them. Now I bet it makes
them feel happy. Lollipop. It does. Yes, bread of angels it's called.
There's a big idea behind it, kind of kingdom of God is within you feel.
First communicants. Hokypoky penny a lump. Then feel all like one family
party, same in the theatre, all in the same swim. They do. I'm sure of
that. Not so lonely. In our confraternity. Then come out a bit spreeish.
Let off steam. Thing is if you really believe in it. Lourdes cure,
waters of oblivion, and the Knock apparition, statues bleeding. Old
fellow asleep near that confessionbox. Hence those snores. Blind faith.
Safe in the arms of kingdom come. Lulls all pain. Wake this time next
year.

He saw the priest stow the communion cup away, well in, and kneel an
instant before it, showing a large grey bootsole from under the lace
affair he had on. Suppose he lost the pin of his. He wouldn't know what
to do to. Bald spot behind. Letters on his back: I.N.R.I? No: I.H.S.
Molly told me one time I asked her. I have sinned: or no: I have
suffered, it is. And the other one? Iron nails ran in.

Meet one Sunday after the rosary. Do not deny my request. Turn up with
a veil and black bag. Dusk and the light behind her. She might be here
with a ribbon round her neck and do the other thing all the same on the
sly. Their character. That fellow that turned queen's evidence on the
invincibles he used to receive the, Carey was his name, the communion
every morning. This very church. Peter Carey, yes. No, Peter Claver I am
thinking of. Denis Carey. And just imagine that. Wife and six children
at home. And plotting that murder all the time. Those crawthumpers,
now that's a good name for them, there's always something shiftylooking
about them. They're not straight men of business either. O, no, she's
not here: the flower: no, no. By the way, did I tear up that envelope?
Yes: under the bridge.

The priest was rinsing out the chalice: then he tossed off the dregs
smartly. Wine. Makes it more aristocratic than for example if he drank
what they are used to Guinness's porter or some temperance beverage
Wheatley's Dublin hop bitters or Cantrell and Cochrane's ginger ale
(aromatic). Doesn't give them any of it: shew wine: only the other.
Cold comfort. Pious fraud but quite right: otherwise they'd have one old
booser worse than another coming along, cadging for a drink. Queer the
whole atmosphere of the. Quite right. Perfectly right that is.

Mr Bloom looked back towards the choir. Not going to be any music. Pity.
Who has the organ here I wonder? Old Glynn he knew how to make that
instrument talk, the _vibrato_: fifty pounds a year they say he had in
Gardiner street. Molly was in fine voice that day, the _Stabat Mater_
of Rossini. Father Bernard Vaughan's sermon first. Christ or Pilate?
Christ, but don't keep us all night over it. Music they wanted.
Footdrill stopped. Could hear a pin drop. I told her to pitch her voice
against that corner. I could feel the thrill in the air, the full, the
people looking up:

_Quis est homo._

Some of that old sacred music splendid. Mercadante: seven last words.
Mozart's twelfth mass: _Gloria_ in that. Those old popes keen on music,
on art and statues and pictures of all kinds. Palestrina for example
too. They had a gay old time while it lasted. Healthy too, chanting,
regular hours, then brew liqueurs. Benedictine. Green Chartreuse. Still,
having eunuchs in their choir that was coming it a bit thick. What kind
of voice is it? Must be curious to hear after their own strong basses.
Connoisseurs. Suppose they wouldn't feel anything after. Kind of a
placid. No worry. Fall into flesh, don't they? Gluttons, tall, long
legs. Who knows? Eunuch. One way out of it.

He saw the priest bend down and kiss the altar and then face about and
bless all the people. All crossed themselves and stood up. Mr Bloom
glanced about him and then stood up, looking over the risen hats. Stand
up at the gospel of course. Then all settled down on their knees again
and he sat back quietly in his bench. The priest came down from the
altar, holding the thing out from him, and he and the massboy answered
each other in Latin. Then the priest knelt down and began to read off a
card:

--O God, our refuge and our strength...

Mr Bloom put his face forward to catch the words. English. Throw them
the bone. I remember slightly. How long since your last mass? Glorious
and immaculate virgin. Joseph, her spouse. Peter and Paul. More
interesting if you understood what it was all about. Wonderful
organisation certainly, goes like clockwork. Confession. Everyone wants
to. Then I will tell you all. Penance. Punish me, please. Great weapon
in their hands. More than doctor or solicitor. Woman dying to. And I
schschschschschsch. And did you chachachachacha? And why did you? Look
down at her ring to find an excuse. Whispering gallery walls have ears.
Husband learn to his surprise. God's little joke. Then out she comes.
Repentance skindeep. Lovely shame. Pray at an altar. Hail Mary and Holy
Mary. Flowers, incense, candles melting. Hide her blushes. Salvation
army blatant imitation. Reformed prostitute will address the meeting.
How I found the Lord. Squareheaded chaps those must be in Rome: they
work the whole show. And don't they rake in the money too? Bequests
also: to the P.P. for the time being in his absolute discretion.
Masses for the repose of my soul to be said publicly with open doors.
Monasteries and convents. The priest in that Fermanagh will case in the
witnessbox. No browbeating him. He had his answer pat for everything.
Liberty and exaltation of our holy mother the church. The doctors of the
church: they mapped out the whole theology of it.

The priest prayed:

--Blessed Michael, archangel, defend us in the hour of conflict. Be
our safeguard against the wickedness and snares of the devil (may God
restrain him, we humbly pray!): and do thou, O prince of the heavenly
host, by the power of God thrust Satan down to hell and with him those
other wicked spirits who wander through the world for the ruin of souls.

The priest and the massboy stood up and walked off. All over. The women
remained behind: thanksgiving.

Better be shoving along. Brother Buzz. Come around with the plate
perhaps. Pay your Easter duty.

He stood up. Hello. Were those two buttons of my waistcoat open all the
time? Women enjoy it. Never tell you. But we. Excuse, miss, there's a
(whh!) just a (whh!) fluff. Or their skirt behind, placket unhooked.
Glimpses of the moon. Annoyed if you don't. Why didn't you tell me
before. Still like you better untidy. Good job it wasn't farther south.
He passed, discreetly buttoning, down the aisle and out through the main
door into the light. He stood a moment unseeing by the cold black marble
bowl while before him and behind two worshippers dipped furtive hands in
the low tide of holy water. Trams: a car of Prescott's dyeworks: a widow
in her weeds. Notice because I'm in mourning myself. He covered himself.
How goes the time? Quarter past. Time enough yet. Better get that lotion
made up. Where is this? Ah yes, the last time. Sweny's in Lincoln place.
Chemists rarely move. Their green and gold beaconjars too heavy to stir.
Hamilton Long's, founded in the year of the flood. Huguenot churchyard
near there. Visit some day.

He walked southward along Westland row. But the recipe is in the other
trousers. O, and I forgot that latchkey too. Bore this funeral affair.
O well, poor fellow, it's not his fault. When was it I got it made up
last? Wait. I changed a sovereign I remember. First of the month it must
have been or the second. O, he can look it up in the prescriptions book.

The chemist turned back page after page. Sandy shrivelled smell he seems
to have. Shrunken skull. And old. Quest for the philosopher's stone. The
alchemists. Drugs age you after mental excitement. Lethargy then. Why?
Reaction. A lifetime in a night. Gradually changes your character.
Living all the day among herbs, ointments, disinfectants. All his
alabaster lilypots. Mortar and pestle. Aq. Dist. Fol. Laur. Te Virid.
Smell almost cure you like the dentist's doorbell. Doctor Whack. He
ought to physic himself a bit. Electuary or emulsion. The first fellow
that picked an herb to cure himself had a bit of pluck. Simples. Want to
be careful. Enough stuff here to chloroform you. Test: turns blue
litmus paper red. Chloroform. Overdose of laudanum. Sleeping draughts.
Lovephiltres. Paragoric poppysyrup bad for cough. Clogs the pores or the
phlegm. Poisons the only cures. Remedy where you least expect it. Clever
of nature.

--About a fortnight ago, sir?

--Yes, Mr Bloom said.

He waited by the counter, inhaling slowly the keen reek of drugs, the
dusty dry smell of sponges and loofahs. Lot of time taken up telling
your aches and pains.

--Sweet almond oil and tincture of benzoin, Mr Bloom said, and then
orangeflower water...

It certainly did make her skin so delicate white like wax.

--And white wax also, he said.

Brings out the darkness of her eyes. Looking at me, the sheet up to
her eyes, Spanish, smelling herself, when I was fixing the links in my
cuffs. Those homely recipes are often the best: strawberries for the
teeth: nettles and rainwater: oatmeal they say steeped in buttermilk.
Skinfood. One of the old queen's sons, duke of Albany was it? had only
one skin. Leopold, yes. Three we have. Warts, bunions and pimples to
make it worse. But you want a perfume too. What perfume does your? _Peau
d'Espagne_. That orangeflower water is so fresh. Nice smell these soaps
have. Pure curd soap. Time to get a bath round the corner. Hammam.
Turkish. Massage. Dirt gets rolled up in your navel. Nicer if a nice
girl did it. Also I think I. Yes I. Do it in the bath. Curious longing
I. Water to water. Combine business with pleasure. Pity no time for
massage. Feel fresh then all the day. Funeral be rather glum.

--Yes, sir, the chemist said. That was two and nine. Have you brought a
bottle?

--No, Mr Bloom said. Make it up, please. I'll call later in the day and
I'll take one of these soaps. How much are they?

--Fourpence, sir.

Mr Bloom raised a cake to his nostrils. Sweet lemony wax.

--I'll take this one, he said. That makes three and a penny.

--Yes, sir, the chemist said. You can pay all together, sir, when you
come back.

--Good, Mr Bloom said.

He strolled out of the shop, the newspaper baton under his armpit, the
coolwrappered soap in his left hand.

At his armpit Bantam Lyons' voice and hand said:

--Hello, Bloom. What's the best news? Is that today's? Show us a minute.

Shaved off his moustache again, by Jove! Long cold upper lip. To look
younger. He does look balmy. Younger than I am.

Bantam Lyons's yellow blacknailed fingers unrolled the baton. Wants a
wash too. Take off the rough dirt. Good morning, have you used Pears'
soap? Dandruff on his shoulders. Scalp wants oiling.

--I want to see about that French horse that's running today, Bantam
Lyons said. Where the bugger is it?

He rustled the pleated pages, jerking his chin on his high collar.
Barber's itch. Tight collar he'll lose his hair. Better leave him the
paper and get shut of him.

--You can keep it, Mr Bloom said.

--Ascot. Gold cup. Wait, Bantam Lyons muttered. Half a mo. Maximum the
second.

--I was just going to throw it away, Mr Bloom said.

Bantam Lyons raised his eyes suddenly and leered weakly.

--What's that? his sharp voice said.

--I say you can keep it, Mr Bloom answered. I was going to throw it away
that moment.

Bantam Lyons doubted an instant, leering: then thrust the outspread
sheets back on Mr Bloom's arms.

--I'll risk it, he said. Here, thanks.

He sped off towards Conway's corner. God speed scut.

Mr Bloom folded the sheets again to a neat square and lodged the soap
in it, smiling. Silly lips of that chap. Betting. Regular hotbed of it
lately. Messenger boys stealing to put on sixpence. Raffle for large
tender turkey. Your Christmas dinner for threepence. Jack Fleming
embezzling to gamble then smuggled off to America. Keeps a hotel now.
They never come back. Fleshpots of Egypt.

He walked cheerfully towards the mosque of the baths. Remind you of a
mosque, redbaked bricks, the minarets. College sports today I see. He
eyed the horseshoe poster over the gate of college park: cyclist doubled
up like a cod in a pot. Damn bad ad. Now if they had made it round
like a wheel. Then the spokes: sports, sports, sports: and the hub big:
college. Something to catch the eye.

There's Hornblower standing at the porter's lodge. Keep him on hands:
might take a turn in there on the nod. How do you do, Mr Hornblower? How
do you do, sir?

Heavenly weather really. If life was always like that. Cricket weather.
Sit around under sunshades. Over after over. Out. They can't play it
here. Duck for six wickets. Still Captain Culler broke a window in the
Kildare street club with a slog to square leg. Donnybrook fair more
in their line. And the skulls we were acracking when M'Carthy took the
floor. Heatwave. Won't last. Always passing, the stream of life, which
in the stream of life we trace is dearer than them all.

Enjoy a bath now: clean trough of water, cool enamel, the gentle tepid
stream. This is my body.

He foresaw his pale body reclined in it at full, naked, in a womb of
warmth, oiled by scented melting soap, softly laved. He saw his
trunk and limbs riprippled over and sustained, buoyed lightly upward,
lemonyellow: his navel, bud of flesh: and saw the dark tangled curls of
his bush floating, floating hair of the stream around the limp father of
thousands, a languid floating flower.



Martin Cunningham, first, poked his silkhatted head into the creaking
carriage and, entering deftly, seated himself. Mr Power stepped in after
him, curving his height with care.

--Come on, Simon.

--After you, Mr Bloom said.

Mr Dedalus covered himself quickly and got in, saying:

Yes, yes.

--Are we all here now? Martin Cunningham asked. Come along, Bloom.

Mr Bloom entered and sat in the vacant place. He pulled the door to
after him and slammed it twice till it shut tight. He passed an arm
through the armstrap and looked seriously from the open carriagewindow
at the lowered blinds of the avenue. One dragged aside: an old woman
peeping. Nose whiteflattened against the pane. Thanking her stars she
was passed over. Extraordinary the interest they take in a corpse. Glad
to see us go we give them such trouble coming. Job seems to suit them.
Huggermugger in corners. Slop about in slipperslappers for fear he'd
wake. Then getting it ready. Laying it out. Molly and Mrs Fleming making
the bed. Pull it more to your side. Our windingsheet. Never know who
will touch you dead. Wash and shampoo. I believe they clip the nails and
the hair. Keep a bit in an envelope. Grows all the same after. Unclean
job.

All waited. Nothing was said. Stowing in the wreaths probably. I am
sitting on something hard. Ah, that soap: in my hip pocket. Better shift
it out of that. Wait for an opportunity.

All waited. Then wheels were heard from in front, turning: then nearer:
then horses' hoofs. A jolt. Their carriage began to move, creaking and
swaying. Other hoofs and creaking wheels started behind. The blinds of
the avenue passed and number nine with its craped knocker, door ajar. At
walking pace.

They waited still, their knees jogging, till they had turned and were
passing along the tramtracks. Tritonville road. Quicker. The wheels
rattled rolling over the cobbled causeway and the crazy glasses shook
rattling in the doorframes.

--What way is he taking us? Mr Power asked through both windows.

--Irishtown, Martin Cunningham said. Ringsend. Brunswick street.

Mr Dedalus nodded, looking out.

--That's a fine old custom, he said. I am glad to see it has not died
out.

All watched awhile through their windows caps and hats lifted by
passers. Respect. The carriage swerved from the tramtrack to the
smoother road past Watery lane. Mr Bloom at gaze saw a lithe young man,
clad in mourning, a wide hat.

--There's a friend of yours gone by, Dedalus, he said.

--Who is that?

--Your son and heir.

--Where is he? Mr Dedalus said, stretching over across.

The carriage, passing the open drains and mounds of rippedup roadway
before the tenement houses, lurched round the corner and, swerving back
to the tramtrack, rolled on noisily with chattering wheels. Mr Dedalus
fell back, saying:

--Was that Mulligan cad with him? His _fidus Achates_!

--No, Mr Bloom said. He was alone.

--Down with his aunt Sally, I suppose, Mr Dedalus said, the Goulding
faction, the drunken little costdrawer and Crissie, papa's little lump
of dung, the wise child that knows her own father.

Mr Bloom smiled joylessly on Ringsend road. Wallace Bros: the
bottleworks: Dodder bridge.

Richie Goulding and the legal bag. Goulding, Collis and Ward he calls
the firm. His jokes are getting a bit damp. Great card he was. Waltzing
in Stamer street with Ignatius Gallaher on a Sunday morning, the
landlady's two hats pinned on his head. Out on the rampage all night.
Beginning to tell on him now: that backache of his, I fear. Wife ironing
his back. Thinks he'll cure it with pills. All breadcrumbs they are.
About six hundred per cent profit.

--He's in with a lowdown crowd, Mr Dedalus snarled. That Mulligan is a
contaminated bloody doubledyed ruffian by all accounts. His name stinks
all over Dublin. But with the help of God and His blessed mother I'll
make it my business to write a letter one of those days to his mother
or his aunt or whatever she is that will open her eye as wide as a gate.
I'll tickle his catastrophe, believe you me.

He cried above the clatter of the wheels:

--I won't have her bastard of a nephew ruin my son. A counterjumper's
son. Selling tapes in my cousin, Peter Paul M'Swiney's. Not likely.

He ceased. Mr Bloom glanced from his angry moustache to Mr Power's mild
face and Martin Cunningham's eyes and beard, gravely shaking. Noisy
selfwilled man. Full of his son. He is right. Something to hand on. If
little Rudy had lived. See him grow up. Hear his voice in the house.
Walking beside Molly in an Eton suit. My son. Me in his eyes. Strange
feeling it would be. From me. Just a chance. Must have been that morning
in Raymond terrace she was at the window watching the two dogs at it by
the wall of the cease to do evil. And the sergeant grinning up. She had
that cream gown on with the rip she never stitched. Give us a touch,
Poldy. God, I'm dying for it. How life begins.

Got big then. Had to refuse the Greystones concert. My son inside her.
I could have helped him on in life. I could. Make him independent. Learn
German too.

--Are we late? Mr Power asked.

--Ten minutes, Martin Cunningham said, looking at his watch.

Molly. Milly. Same thing watered down. Her tomboy oaths. O jumping
Jupiter! Ye gods and little fishes! Still, she's a dear girl. Soon be a
woman. Mullingar. Dearest Papli. Young student. Yes, yes: a woman too.
Life, life.

The carriage heeled over and back, their four trunks swaying.

--Corny might have given us a more commodious yoke, Mr Power said.

--He might, Mr Dedalus said, if he hadn't that squint troubling him. Do
you follow me?

He closed his left eye. Martin Cunningham began to brush away
crustcrumbs from under his thighs.

--What is this, he said, in the name of God? Crumbs?

--Someone seems to have been making a picnic party here lately, Mr Power
said.

All raised their thighs and eyed with disfavour the mildewed buttonless
leather of the seats. Mr Dedalus, twisting his nose, frowned downward
and said:

--Unless I'm greatly mistaken. What do you think, Martin?

--It struck me too, Martin Cunningham said.

Mr Bloom set his thigh down. Glad I took that bath. Feel my feet quite
clean. But I wish Mrs Fleming had darned these socks better.

Mr Dedalus sighed resignedly.

--After all, he said, it's the most natural thing in the world.

--Did Tom Kernan turn up? Martin Cunningham asked, twirling the peak of
his beard gently.

--Yes, Mr Bloom answered. He's behind with Ned Lambert and Hynes.

--And Corny Kelleher himself? Mr Power asked.

--At the cemetery, Martin Cunningham said.

--I met M'Coy this morning, Mr Bloom said. He said he'd try to come.

The carriage halted short.

--What's wrong?

--We're stopped.

--Where are we?

Mr Bloom put his head out of the window.

--The grand canal, he said.

Gasworks. Whooping cough they say it cures. Good job Milly never got
it. Poor children! Doubles them up black and blue in convulsions. Shame
really. Got off lightly with illnesses compared. Only measles. Flaxseed
tea. Scarlatina, influenza epidemics. Canvassing for death. Don't miss
this chance. Dogs' home over there. Poor old Athos! Be good to Athos,
Leopold, is my last wish. Thy will be done. We obey them in the grave.
A dying scrawl. He took it to heart, pined away. Quiet brute. Old men's
dogs usually are.

A raindrop spat on his hat. He drew back and saw an instant of shower
spray dots over the grey flags. Apart. Curious. Like through a colander.
I thought it would. My boots were creaking I remember now.

--The weather is changing, he said quietly.

--A pity it did not keep up fine, Martin Cunningham said.

--Wanted for the country, Mr Power said. There's the sun again coming
out.

Mr Dedalus, peering through his glasses towards the veiled sun, hurled a
mute curse at the sky.

--It's as uncertain as a child's bottom, he said.

--We're off again.

The carriage turned again its stiff wheels and their trunks swayed
gently. Martin Cunningham twirled more quickly the peak of his beard.

--Tom Kernan was immense last night, he said. And Paddy Leonard taking
him off to his face.

--O, draw him out, Martin, Mr Power said eagerly. Wait till you hear
him, Simon, on Ben Dollard's singing of _The Croppy Boy_.

--Immense, Martin Cunningham said pompously. _His singing of that simple
ballad, Martin, is the most trenchant rendering I ever heard in the
whole course of my experience._

--Trenchant, Mr Power said laughing. He's dead nuts on that. And the
retrospective arrangement.

--Did you read Dan Dawson's speech? Martin Cunningham asked.

--I did not then, Mr Dedalus said. Where is it?

--In the paper this morning.

Mr Bloom took the paper from his inside pocket. That book I must change
for her.

--No, no, Mr Dedalus said quickly. Later on please.

Mr Bloom's glance travelled down the edge of the paper, scanning the
deaths: Callan, Coleman, Dignam, Fawcett, Lowry, Naumann, Peake, what
Peake is that? is it the chap was in Crosbie and Alleyne's? no, Sexton,
Urbright. Inked characters fast fading on the frayed breaking paper.
Thanks to the Little Flower. Sadly missed. To the inexpressible grief of
his. Aged 88 after a long and tedious illness. Month's mind: Quinlan. On
whose soul Sweet Jesus have mercy.

_It is now a month since dear Henry fled To his home up above in the sky
While his family weeps and mourns his loss Hoping some day to meet him
on high._

I tore up the envelope? Yes. Where did I put her letter after I read it
in the bath? He patted his waistcoatpocket. There all right. Dear Henry
fled. Before my patience are exhausted.

National school. Meade's yard. The hazard. Only two there now. Nodding.
Full as a tick. Too much bone in their skulls. The other trotting round
with a fare. An hour ago I was passing there. The jarvies raised their
hats.

A pointsman's back straightened itself upright suddenly against a
tramway standard by Mr Bloom's window. Couldn't they invent something
automatic so that the wheel itself much handier? Well but that fellow
would lose his job then? Well but then another fellow would get a job
making the new invention?

Antient concert rooms. Nothing on there. A man in a buff suit with a
crape armlet. Not much grief there. Quarter mourning. People in law
perhaps.

They went past the bleak pulpit of saint Mark's, under the railway
bridge, past the Queen's theatre: in silence. Hoardings: Eugene
Stratton, Mrs Bandmann Palmer. Could I go to see LEAH tonight, I wonder.
I said I. Or the _Lily of Killarney_? Elster Grimes Opera Company. Big
powerful change. Wet bright bills for next week. _Fun on the Bristol_.
Martin Cunningham could work a pass for the Gaiety. Have to stand a
drink or two. As broad as it's long.

He's coming in the afternoon. Her songs.

Plasto's. Sir Philip Crampton's memorial fountain bust. Who was he?

--How do you do? Martin Cunningham said, raising his palm to his brow in
salute.

--He doesn't see us, Mr Power said. Yes, he does. How do you do?

--Who? Mr Dedalus asked.

--Blazes Boylan, Mr Power said. There he is airing his quiff.

Just that moment I was thinking.

Mr Dedalus bent across to salute. From the door of the Red Bank the
white disc of a straw hat flashed reply: spruce figure: passed.

Mr Bloom reviewed the nails of his left hand, then those of his right
hand. The nails, yes. Is there anything more in him that they she sees?
Fascination. Worst man in Dublin. That keeps him alive. They sometimes
feel what a person is. Instinct. But a type like that. My nails. I
am just looking at them: well pared. And after: thinking alone. Body
getting a bit softy. I would notice that: from remembering. What causes
that? I suppose the skin can't contract quickly enough when the flesh
falls off. But the shape is there. The shape is there still. Shoulders.
Hips. Plump. Night of the dance dressing. Shift stuck between the cheeks
behind.

He clasped his hands between his knees and, satisfied, sent his vacant
glance over their faces.

Mr Power asked:

--How is the concert tour getting on, Bloom?

--O, very well, Mr Bloom said. I hear great accounts of it. It's a good
idea, you see...

--Are you going yourself?

--Well no, Mr Bloom said. In point of fact I have to go down to the
county Clare on some private business. You see the idea is to tour the
chief towns. What you lose on one you can make up on the other.

--Quite so, Martin Cunningham said. Mary Anderson is up there now.

Have you good artists?

--Louis Werner is touring her, Mr Bloom said. O yes, we'll have all
topnobbers. J. C. Doyle and John MacCormack I hope and. The best, in
fact.

--And _Madame_, Mr Power said smiling. Last but not least.

Mr Bloom unclasped his hands in a gesture of soft politeness and clasped
them. Smith O'Brien. Someone has laid a bunch of flowers there. Woman.
Must be his deathday. For many happy returns. The carriage wheeling by
Farrell's statue united noiselessly their unresisting knees.

Oot: a dullgarbed old man from the curbstone tendered his wares, his
mouth opening: oot.

--Four bootlaces for a penny.

Wonder why he was struck off the rolls. Had his office in Hume street.
Same house as Molly's namesake, Tweedy, crown solicitor for Waterford.
Has that silk hat ever since. Relics of old decency. Mourning too.
Terrible comedown, poor wretch! Kicked about like snuff at a wake.
O'Callaghan on his last legs.

And _Madame_. Twenty past eleven. Up. Mrs Fleming is in to clean. Doing
her hair, humming. _voglio e non vorrei_. No. _vorrei e non_. Looking at
the tips of her hairs to see if they are split. _Mi trema un poco
il_. Beautiful on that _tre_ her voice is: weeping tone. A thrush. A
throstle. There is a word throstle that expresses that.

His eyes passed lightly over Mr Power's goodlooking face. Greyish over
the ears. _Madame_: smiling. I smiled back. A smile goes a long way.
Only politeness perhaps. Nice fellow. Who knows is that true about the
woman he keeps? Not pleasant for the wife. Yet they say, who was it
told me, there is no carnal. You would imagine that would get played
out pretty quick. Yes, it was Crofton met him one evening bringing her
a pound of rumpsteak. What is this she was? Barmaid in Jury's. Or the
Moira, was it?

They passed under the hugecloaked Liberator's form.

Martin Cunningham nudged Mr Power.

--Of the tribe of Reuben, he said.

A tall blackbearded figure, bent on a stick, stumping round the corner
of Elvery's Elephant house, showed them a curved hand open on his spine.

--In all his pristine beauty, Mr Power said.

Mr Dedalus looked after the stumping figure and said mildly:

--The devil break the hasp of your back!

Mr Power, collapsing in laughter, shaded his face from the window as the
carriage passed Gray's statue.

--We have all been there, Martin Cunningham said broadly.

His eyes met Mr Bloom's eyes. He caressed his beard, adding:

--Well, nearly all of us.

Mr Bloom began to speak with sudden eagerness to his companions' faces.

--That's an awfully good one that's going the rounds about Reuben J and
the son.

--About the boatman? Mr Power asked.

--Yes. Isn't it awfully good?

--What is that? Mr Dedalus asked. I didn't hear it.

--There was a girl in the case, Mr Bloom began, and he determined to
send him to the Isle of Man out of harm's way but when they were both
...

--What? Mr Dedalus asked. That confirmed bloody hobbledehoy is it?

--Yes, Mr Bloom said. They were both on the way to the boat and he tried
to drown...

--Drown Barabbas! Mr Dedalus cried. I wish to Christ he did!

Mr Power sent a long laugh down his shaded nostrils.

--No, Mr Bloom said, the son himself...

Martin Cunningham thwarted his speech rudely:

--Reuben and the son were piking it down the quay next the river on
their way to the Isle of Man boat and the young chiseller suddenly got
loose and over the wall with him into the Liffey.

--For God's sake! Mr Dedalus exclaimed in fright. Is he dead?

--Dead! Martin Cunningham cried. Not he! A boatman got a pole and fished
him out by the slack of the breeches and he was landed up to the father
on the quay more dead than alive. Half the town was there.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said. But the funny part is...

--And Reuben J, Martin Cunningham said, gave the boatman a florin for
saving his son's life.

A stifled sigh came from under Mr Power's hand.

--O, he did, Martin Cunningham affirmed. Like a hero. A silver florin.

--Isn't it awfully good? Mr Bloom said eagerly.

--One and eightpence too much, Mr Dedalus said drily.

Mr Power's choked laugh burst quietly in the carriage.

Nelson's pillar.

--Eight plums a penny! Eight for a penny!

--We had better look a little serious, Martin Cunningham said.

Mr Dedalus sighed.

--Ah then indeed, he said, poor little Paddy wouldn't grudge us a laugh.
Many a good one he told himself.

--The Lord forgive me! Mr Power said, wiping his wet eyes with his
fingers. Poor Paddy! I little thought a week ago when I saw him last and
he was in his usual health that I'd be driving after him like this. He's
gone from us.

--As decent a little man as ever wore a hat, Mr Dedalus said. He went
very suddenly.

--Breakdown, Martin Cunningham said. Heart.

He tapped his chest sadly.

Blazing face: redhot. Too much John Barleycorn. Cure for a red nose.
Drink like the devil till it turns adelite. A lot of money he spent
colouring it.

Mr Power gazed at the passing houses with rueful apprehension.

--He had a sudden death, poor fellow, he said.

--The best death, Mr Bloom said.

Their wide open eyes looked at him.

--No suffering, he said. A moment and all is over. Like dying in sleep.

No-one spoke.

Dead side of the street this. Dull business by day, land agents,
temperance hotel, Falconer's railway guide, civil service college,
Gill's, catholic club, the industrious blind. Why? Some reason. Sun or
wind. At night too. Chummies and slaveys. Under the patronage of the
late Father Mathew. Foundation stone for Parnell. Breakdown. Heart.

White horses with white frontlet plumes came round the Rotunda corner,
galloping. A tiny coffin flashed by. In a hurry to bury. A mourning
coach. Unmarried. Black for the married. Piebald for bachelors. Dun for
a nun.

--Sad, Martin Cunningham said. A child.

A dwarf's face, mauve and wrinkled like little Rudy's was. Dwarf's body,
weak as putty, in a whitelined deal box. Burial friendly society
pays. Penny a week for a sod of turf. Our. Little. Beggar. Baby. Meant
nothing. Mistake of nature. If it's healthy it's from the mother. If not
from the man. Better luck next time.

--Poor little thing, Mr Dedalus said. It's well out of it.

The carriage climbed more slowly the hill of Rutland square. Rattle his
bones. Over the stones. Only a pauper. Nobody owns.

--In the midst of life, Martin Cunningham said.

--But the worst of all, Mr Power said, is the man who takes his own
life.

Martin Cunningham drew out his watch briskly, coughed and put it back.

--The greatest disgrace to have in the family, Mr Power added.

--Temporary insanity, of course, Martin Cunningham said decisively. We
must take a charitable view of it.

--They say a man who does it is a coward, Mr Dedalus said.

--It is not for us to judge, Martin Cunningham said.

Mr Bloom, about to speak, closed his lips again. Martin Cunningham's
large eyes. Looking away now. Sympathetic human man he is. Intelligent.
Like Shakespeare's face. Always a good word to say. They have no mercy
on that here or infanticide. Refuse christian burial. They used to drive
a stake of wood through his heart in the grave. As if it wasn't broken
already. Yet sometimes they repent too late. Found in the riverbed
clutching rushes. He looked at me. And that awful drunkard of a wife
of his. Setting up house for her time after time and then pawning the
furniture on him every Saturday almost. Leading him the life of the
damned. Wear the heart out of a stone, that. Monday morning. Start
afresh. Shoulder to the wheel. Lord, she must have looked a sight
that night Dedalus told me he was in there. Drunk about the place and
capering with Martin's umbrella.

     _And they call me the jewel of Asia,
     Of Asia,
     The Geisha._

He looked away from me. He knows. Rattle his bones.

That afternoon of the inquest. The redlabelled bottle on the table. The
room in the hotel with hunting pictures. Stuffy it was. Sunlight through
the slats of the Venetian blind. The coroner's sunlit ears, big and
hairy. Boots giving evidence. Thought he was asleep first. Then saw like
yellow streaks on his face. Had slipped down to the foot of the bed.
Verdict: overdose. Death by misadventure. The letter. For my son
Leopold.

No more pain. Wake no more. Nobody owns.

The carriage rattled swiftly along Blessington street. Over the stones.

--We are going the pace, I think, Martin Cunningham said.

--God grant he doesn't upset us on the road, Mr Power said.

--I hope not, Martin Cunningham said. That will be a great race tomorrow
in Germany. The Gordon Bennett.

--Yes, by Jove, Mr Dedalus said. That will be worth seeing, faith.

As they turned into Berkeley street a streetorgan near the Basin sent
over and after them a rollicking rattling song of the halls. Has anybody
here seen Kelly? Kay ee double ell wy. Dead March from _Saul._ He's
as bad as old Antonio. He left me on my ownio. Pirouette! The _Mater
Misericordiae_. Eccles street. My house down there. Big place. Ward for
incurables there. Very encouraging. Our Lady's Hospice for the dying.
Deadhouse handy underneath. Where old Mrs Riordan died. They look
terrible the women. Her feeding cup and rubbing her mouth with the
spoon. Then the screen round her bed for her to die. Nice young student
that was dressed that bite the bee gave me. He's gone over to the
lying-in hospital they told me. From one extreme to the other. The
carriage galloped round a corner: stopped.

--What's wrong now?

A divided drove of branded cattle passed the windows, lowing, slouching
by on padded hoofs, whisking their tails slowly on their clotted bony
croups. Outside them and through them ran raddled sheep bleating their
fear.

--Emigrants, Mr Power said.

--Huuuh! the drover's voice cried, his switch sounding on their flanks.

Huuuh! out of that!

Thursday, of course. Tomorrow is killing day. Springers. Cuffe sold them
about twentyseven quid each. For Liverpool probably. Roastbeef for old
England. They buy up all the juicy ones. And then the fifth quarter
lost: all that raw stuff, hide, hair, horns. Comes to a big thing in a
year. Dead meat trade. Byproducts of the slaughterhouses for tanneries,
soap, margarine. Wonder if that dodge works now getting dicky meat off
the train at Clonsilla.

The carriage moved on through the drove.

--I can't make out why the corporation doesn't run a tramline from the
parkgate to the quays, Mr Bloom said. All those animals could be taken
in trucks down to the boats.

--Instead of blocking up the thoroughfare, Martin Cunningham said. Quite
right. They ought to.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said, and another thing I often thought, is to have
municipal funeral trams like they have in Milan, you know. Run the line
out to the cemetery gates and have special trams, hearse and carriage
and all. Don't you see what I mean?

--O, that be damned for a story, Mr Dedalus said. Pullman car and saloon
diningroom.

--A poor lookout for Corny, Mr Power added.

--Why? Mr Bloom asked, turning to Mr Dedalus. Wouldn't it be more decent
than galloping two abreast?

--Well, there's something in that, Mr Dedalus granted.

--And, Martin Cunningham said, we wouldn't have scenes like that when
the hearse capsized round Dunphy's and upset the coffin on to the road.

--That was terrible, Mr Power's shocked face said, and the corpse fell
about the road. Terrible!

--First round Dunphy's, Mr Dedalus said, nodding. Gordon Bennett cup.

--Praises be to God! Martin Cunningham said piously.

Bom! Upset. A coffin bumped out on to the road. Burst open. Paddy Dignam
shot out and rolling over stiff in the dust in a brown habit too large
for him. Red face: grey now. Mouth fallen open. Asking what's up now.
Quite right to close it. Looks horrid open. Then the insides decompose
quickly. Much better to close up all the orifices. Yes, also. With wax.
The sphincter loose. Seal up all.

--Dunphy's, Mr Power announced as the carriage turned right.

Dunphy's corner. Mourning coaches drawn up, drowning their grief. A
pause by the wayside. Tiptop position for a pub. Expect we'll pull up
here on the way back to drink his health. Pass round the consolation.
Elixir of life.

But suppose now it did happen. Would he bleed if a nail say cut him
in the knocking about? He would and he wouldn't, I suppose. Depends on
where. The circulation stops. Still some might ooze out of an artery. It
would be better to bury them in red: a dark red.

In silence they drove along Phibsborough road. An empty hearse trotted
by, coming from the cemetery: looks relieved.

Crossguns bridge: the royal canal.

Water rushed roaring through the sluices. A man stood on his
dropping barge, between clamps of turf. On the towpath by the lock a
slacktethered horse. Aboard of the _Bugabu._

Their eyes watched him. On the slow weedy waterway he had floated on his
raft coastward over Ireland drawn by a haulage rope past beds of
reeds, over slime, mudchoked bottles, carrion dogs. Athlone, Mullingar,
Moyvalley, I could make a walking tour to see Milly by the canal. Or
cycle down. Hire some old crock, safety. Wren had one the other day at
the auction but a lady's. Developing waterways. James M'Cann's hobby
to row me o'er the ferry. Cheaper transit. By easy stages. Houseboats.
Camping out. Also hearses. To heaven by water. Perhaps I will without
writing. Come as a surprise, Leixlip, Clonsilla. Dropping down lock by
lock to Dublin. With turf from the midland bogs. Salute. He lifted his
brown straw hat, saluting Paddy Dignam.

They drove on past Brian Boroimhe house. Near it now.

--I wonder how is our friend Fogarty getting on, Mr Power said.

--Better ask Tom Kernan, Mr Dedalus said.

--How is that? Martin Cunningham said. Left him weeping, I suppose?

--Though lost to sight, Mr Dedalus said, to memory dear.

The carriage steered left for Finglas road.

The stonecutter's yard on the right. Last lap. Crowded on the spit of
land silent shapes appeared, white, sorrowful, holding out calm hands,
knelt in grief, pointing. Fragments of shapes, hewn. In white silence:
appealing. The best obtainable. Thos. H. Dennany, monumental builder and
sculptor.

Passed.

On the curbstone before Jimmy Geary, the sexton's, an old tramp sat,
grumbling, emptying the dirt and stones out of his huge dustbrown
yawning boot. After life's journey.

Gloomy gardens then went by: one by one: gloomy houses.

Mr Power pointed.

--That is where Childs was murdered, he said. The last house.

--So it is, Mr Dedalus said. A gruesome case. Seymour Bushe got him off.
Murdered his brother. Or so they said.

--The crown had no evidence, Mr Power said.

--Only circumstantial, Martin Cunningham added. That's the maxim of the
law. Better for ninetynine guilty to escape than for one innocent person
to be wrongfully condemned.

They looked. Murderer's ground. It passed darkly. Shuttered, tenantless,
unweeded garden. Whole place gone to hell. Wrongfully condemned. Murder.
The murderer's image in the eye of the murdered. They love reading about
it. Man's head found in a garden. Her clothing consisted of. How she met
her death. Recent outrage. The weapon used. Murderer is still at large.
Clues. A shoelace. The body to be exhumed. Murder will out.

Cramped in this carriage. She mightn't like me to come that way without
letting her know. Must be careful about women. Catch them once with
their pants down. Never forgive you after. Fifteen.

The high railings of Prospect rippled past their gaze. Dark poplars,
rare white forms. Forms more frequent, white shapes thronged amid the
trees, white forms and fragments streaming by mutely, sustaining vain
gestures on the air.

The felly harshed against the curbstone: stopped. Martin Cunningham put
out his arm and, wrenching back the handle, shoved the door open with
his knee. He stepped out. Mr Power and Mr Dedalus followed.

Change that soap now. Mr Bloom's hand unbuttoned his hip pocket swiftly
and transferred the paperstuck soap to his inner handkerchief pocket.
He stepped out of the carriage, replacing the newspaper his other hand
still held.

Paltry funeral: coach and three carriages. It's all the same.
Pallbearers, gold reins, requiem mass, firing a volley. Pomp of death.
Beyond the hind carriage a hawker stood by his barrow of cakes and
fruit. Simnel cakes those are, stuck together: cakes for the dead.
Dogbiscuits. Who ate them? Mourners coming out.

He followed his companions. Mr Kernan and Ned Lambert followed, Hynes
walking after them. Corny Kelleher stood by the opened hearse and took
out the two wreaths. He handed one to the boy.

Where is that child's funeral disappeared to?

A team of horses passed from Finglas with toiling plodding tread,
dragging through the funereal silence a creaking waggon on which lay a
granite block. The waggoner marching at their head saluted.

Coffin now. Got here before us, dead as he is. Horse looking round at it
with his plume skeowways. Dull eye: collar tight on his neck, pressing
on a bloodvessel or something. Do they know what they cart out here
every day? Must be twenty or thirty funerals every day. Then Mount
Jerome for the protestants. Funerals all over the world everywhere every
minute. Shovelling them under by the cartload doublequick. Thousands
every hour. Too many in the world.

Mourners came out through the gates: woman and a girl. Leanjawed harpy,
hard woman at a bargain, her bonnet awry. Girl's face stained with dirt
and tears, holding the woman's arm, looking up at her for a sign to cry.
Fish's face, bloodless and livid.

The mutes shouldered the coffin and bore it in through the gates. So
much dead weight. Felt heavier myself stepping out of that bath. First
the stiff: then the friends of the stiff. Corny Kelleher and the
boy followed with their wreaths. Who is that beside them? Ah, the
brother-in-law.

All walked after.

Martin Cunningham whispered:

--I was in mortal agony with you talking of suicide before Bloom.

--What? Mr Power whispered. How so?

--His father poisoned himself, Martin Cunningham whispered. Had the
Queen's hotel in Ennis. You heard him say he was going to Clare.
Anniversary.

--O God! Mr Power whispered. First I heard of it. Poisoned himself?

He glanced behind him to where a face with dark thinking eyes followed
towards the cardinal's mausoleum. Speaking.

--Was he insured? Mr Bloom asked.

--I believe so, Mr Kernan answered. But the policy was heavily
mortgaged. Martin is trying to get the youngster into Artane.

--How many children did he leave?

--Five. Ned Lambert says he'll try to get one of the girls into Todd's.

--A sad case, Mr Bloom said gently. Five young children.

--A great blow to the poor wife, Mr Kernan added.

--Indeed yes, Mr Bloom agreed.

Has the laugh at him now.

He looked down at the boots he had blacked and polished. She had
outlived him. Lost her husband. More dead for her than for me. One must
outlive the other. Wise men say. There are more women than men in the
world. Condole with her. Your terrible loss. I hope you'll soon follow
him. For Hindu widows only. She would marry another. Him? No. Yet who
knows after. Widowhood not the thing since the old queen died. Drawn on
a guncarriage. Victoria and Albert. Frogmore memorial mourning. But
in the end she put a few violets in her bonnet. Vain in her heart of
hearts. All for a shadow. Consort not even a king. Her son was the
substance. Something new to hope for not like the past she wanted back,
waiting. It never comes. One must go first: alone, under the ground: and
lie no more in her warm bed.

--How are you, Simon? Ned Lambert said softly, clasping hands. Haven't
seen you for a month of Sundays.

--Never better. How are all in Cork's own town?

--I was down there for the Cork park races on Easter Monday, Ned Lambert
said. Same old six and eightpence. Stopped with Dick Tivy.

--And how is Dick, the solid man?

--Nothing between himself and heaven, Ned Lambert answered.

--By the holy Paul! Mr Dedalus said in subdued wonder. Dick Tivy bald?

--Martin is going to get up a whip for the youngsters, Ned Lambert said,
pointing ahead. A few bob a skull. Just to keep them going till the
insurance is cleared up.

--Yes, yes, Mr Dedalus said dubiously. Is that the eldest boy in front?

--Yes, Ned Lambert said, with the wife's brother. John Henry Menton is
behind. He put down his name for a quid.

--I'll engage he did, Mr Dedalus said. I often told poor Paddy he ought
to mind that job. John Henry is not the worst in the world.

--How did he lose it? Ned Lambert asked. Liquor, what?

--Many a good man's fault, Mr Dedalus said with a sigh.

They halted about the door of the mortuary chapel. Mr Bloom stood behind
the boy with the wreath looking down at his sleekcombed hair and at the
slender furrowed neck inside his brandnew collar. Poor boy! Was he there
when the father? Both unconscious. Lighten up at the last moment
and recognise for the last time. All he might have done. I owe three
shillings to O'Grady. Would he understand? The mutes bore the coffin
into the chapel. Which end is his head?

After a moment he followed the others in, blinking in the screened
light. The coffin lay on its bier before the chancel, four tall yellow
candles at its corners. Always in front of us. Corny Kelleher, laying a
wreath at each fore corner, beckoned to the boy to kneel. The mourners
knelt here and there in prayingdesks. Mr Bloom stood behind near the
font and, when all had knelt, dropped carefully his unfolded newspaper
from his pocket and knelt his right knee upon it. He fitted his black
hat gently on his left knee and, holding its brim, bent over piously.

A server bearing a brass bucket with something in it came out through a
door. The whitesmocked priest came after him, tidying his stole with one
hand, balancing with the other a little book against his toad's belly.
Who'll read the book? I, said the rook.

They halted by the bier and the priest began to read out of his book
with a fluent croak.

Father Coffey. I knew his name was like a coffin. _Domine-namine._ Bully
about the muzzle he looks. Bosses the show. Muscular christian. Woe
betide anyone that looks crooked at him: priest. Thou art Peter. Burst
sideways like a sheep in clover Dedalus says he will. With a belly on
him like a poisoned pup. Most amusing expressions that man finds. Hhhn:
burst sideways.

_--Non intres in judicium cum servo tuo, Domine._

Makes them feel more important to be prayed over in Latin. Requiem mass.
Crape weepers. Blackedged notepaper. Your name on the altarlist. Chilly
place this. Want to feed well, sitting in there all the morning in the
gloom kicking his heels waiting for the next please. Eyes of a toad too.
What swells him up that way? Molly gets swelled after cabbage. Air of
the place maybe. Looks full up of bad gas. Must be an infernal lot
of bad gas round the place. Butchers, for instance: they get like raw
beefsteaks. Who was telling me? Mervyn Browne. Down in the vaults of
saint Werburgh's lovely old organ hundred and fifty they have to bore a
hole in the coffins sometimes to let out the bad gas and burn it. Out it
rushes: blue. One whiff of that and you're a goner.

My kneecap is hurting me. Ow. That's better.

The priest took a stick with a knob at the end of it out of the boy's
bucket and shook it over the coffin. Then he walked to the other end and
shook it again. Then he came back and put it back in the bucket. As you
were before you rested. It's all written down: he has to do it.

_--Et ne nos inducas in tentationem._

The server piped the answers in the treble. I often thought it would be
better to have boy servants. Up to fifteen or so. After that, of course
...

Holy water that was, I expect. Shaking sleep out of it. He must be fed
up with that job, shaking that thing over all the corpses they trot up.
What harm if he could see what he was shaking it over. Every mortal
day a fresh batch: middleaged men, old women, children, women dead in
childbirth, men with beards, baldheaded businessmen, consumptive girls
with little sparrows' breasts. All the year round he prayed the same
thing over them all and shook water on top of them: sleep. On Dignam
now.

_--In paradisum._

Said he was going to paradise or is in paradise. Says that over
everybody. Tiresome kind of a job. But he has to say something.

The priest closed his book and went off, followed by the server. Corny
Kelleher opened the sidedoors and the gravediggers came in, hoisted the
coffin again, carried it out and shoved it on their cart. Corny Kelleher
gave one wreath to the boy and one to the brother-in-law. All followed
them out of the sidedoors into the mild grey air. Mr Bloom came last
folding his paper again into his pocket. He gazed gravely at the ground
till the coffincart wheeled off to the left. The metal wheels ground the
gravel with a sharp grating cry and the pack of blunt boots followed the
trundled barrow along a lane of sepulchres.

The ree the ra the ree the ra the roo. Lord, I mustn't lilt here.

--The O'Connell circle, Mr Dedalus said about him.

Mr Power's soft eyes went up to the apex of the lofty cone.

--He's at rest, he said, in the middle of his people, old Dan O'. But
his heart is buried in Rome. How many broken hearts are buried here,
Simon!

--Her grave is over there, Jack, Mr Dedalus said. I'll soon be stretched
beside her. Let Him take me whenever He likes.

Breaking down, he began to weep to himself quietly, stumbling a little
in his walk. Mr Power took his arm.

--She's better where she is, he said kindly.

--I suppose so, Mr Dedalus said with a weak gasp. I suppose she is in
heaven if there is a heaven.

Corny Kelleher stepped aside from his rank and allowed the mourners to
plod by.

--Sad occasions, Mr Kernan began politely.

Mr Bloom closed his eyes and sadly twice bowed his head.

--The others are putting on their hats, Mr Kernan said. I suppose we can
do so too. We are the last. This cemetery is a treacherous place.

They covered their heads.

--The reverend gentleman read the service too quickly, don't you think?
Mr Kernan said with reproof.

Mr Bloom nodded gravely looking in the quick bloodshot eyes. Secret
eyes, secretsearching. Mason, I think: not sure. Beside him again. We
are the last. In the same boat. Hope he'll say something else.

Mr Kernan added:

--The service of the Irish church used in Mount Jerome is simpler, more
impressive I must say.

Mr Bloom gave prudent assent. The language of course was another thing.

Mr Kernan said with solemnity:

--_I am the resurrection and the life_. That touches a man's inmost
heart.

--It does, Mr Bloom said.

Your heart perhaps but what price the fellow in the six feet by two
with his toes to the daisies? No touching that. Seat of the affections.
Broken heart. A pump after all, pumping thousands of gallons of blood
every day. One fine day it gets bunged up: and there you are. Lots of
them lying around here: lungs, hearts, livers. Old rusty pumps: damn
the thing else. The resurrection and the life. Once you are dead you are
dead. That last day idea. Knocking them all up out of their graves. Come
forth, Lazarus! And he came fifth and lost the job. Get up! Last day!
Then every fellow mousing around for his liver and his lights and the
rest of his traps. Find damn all of himself that morning. Pennyweight of
powder in a skull. Twelve grammes one pennyweight. Troy measure.

Corny Kelleher fell into step at their side.

--Everything went off A1, he said. What?

He looked on them from his drawling eye. Policeman's shoulders. With
your tooraloom tooraloom.

--As it should be, Mr Kernan said.

--What? Eh? Corny Kelleher said.

Mr Kernan assured him.

--Who is that chap behind with Tom Kernan? John Henry Menton asked. I
know his face.

Ned Lambert glanced back.

--Bloom, he said, Madame Marion Tweedy that was, is, I mean, the
soprano. She's his wife.

--O, to be sure, John Henry Menton said. I haven't seen her for some
time. He was a finelooking woman. I danced with her, wait, fifteen
seventeen golden years ago, at Mat Dillon's in Roundtown. And a good
armful she was.

He looked behind through the others.

--What is he? he asked. What does he do? Wasn't he in the stationery
line? I fell foul of him one evening, I remember, at bowls.

Ned Lambert smiled.

--Yes, he was, he said, in Wisdom Hely's. A traveller for blottingpaper.

--In God's name, John Henry Menton said, what did she marry a coon like
that for? She had plenty of game in her then.

--Has still, Ned Lambert said. He does some canvassing for ads.

John Henry Menton's large eyes stared ahead.

The barrow turned into a side lane. A portly man, ambushed among the
grasses, raised his hat in homage. The gravediggers touched their caps.

--John O'Connell, Mr Power said pleased. He never forgets a friend.

Mr O'Connell shook all their hands in silence. Mr Dedalus said:

--I am come to pay you another visit.

--My dear Simon, the caretaker answered in a low voice. I don't want
your custom at all.

Saluting Ned Lambert and John Henry Menton he walked on at Martin
Cunningham's side puzzling two long keys at his back.

--Did you hear that one, he asked them, about Mulcahy from the Coombe?

--I did not, Martin Cunningham said.

They bent their silk hats in concert and Hynes inclined his ear. The
caretaker hung his thumbs in the loops of his gold watchchain and spoke
in a discreet tone to their vacant smiles.

--They tell the story, he said, that two drunks came out here one foggy
evening to look for the grave of a friend of theirs. They asked for
Mulcahy from the Coombe and were told where he was buried. After
traipsing about in the fog they found the grave sure enough. One of the
drunks spelt out the name: Terence Mulcahy. The other drunk was blinking
up at a statue of Our Saviour the widow had got put up.

The caretaker blinked up at one of the sepulchres they passed. He
resumed:

--And, after blinking up at the sacred figure, _Not a bloody bit like
the man_, says he. _That's not Mulcahy_, says he, _whoever done it_.

Rewarded by smiles he fell back and spoke with Corny Kelleher, accepting
the dockets given him, turning them over and scanning them as he walked.

--That's all done with a purpose, Martin Cunningham explained to Hynes.

--I know, Hynes said. I know that.

--To cheer a fellow up, Martin Cunningham said. It's pure
goodheartedness: damn the thing else.

Mr Bloom admired the caretaker's prosperous bulk. All want to be on good
terms with him. Decent fellow, John O'Connell, real good sort. Keys:
like Keyes's ad: no fear of anyone getting out. No passout checks.
_Habeas corpus_. I must see about that ad after the funeral. Did I
write Ballsbridge on the envelope I took to cover when she disturbed me
writing to Martha? Hope it's not chucked in the dead letter office. Be
the better of a shave. Grey sprouting beard. That's the first sign when
the hairs come out grey. And temper getting cross. Silver threads among
the grey. Fancy being his wife. Wonder he had the gumption to propose to
any girl. Come out and live in the graveyard. Dangle that before her. It
might thrill her first. Courting death... Shades of night hovering
here with all the dead stretched about. The shadows of the tombs when
churchyards yawn and Daniel O'Connell must be a descendant I suppose
who is this used to say he was a queer breedy man great catholic all the
same like a big giant in the dark. Will o' the wisp. Gas of graves.
Want to keep her mind off it to conceive at all. Women especially are so
touchy. Tell her a ghost story in bed to make her sleep. Have you ever
seen a ghost? Well, I have. It was a pitchdark night. The clock was on
the stroke of twelve. Still they'd kiss all right if properly keyed up.
Whores in Turkish graveyards. Learn anything if taken young. You might
pick up a young widow here. Men like that. Love among the tombstones.
Romeo. Spice of pleasure. In the midst of death we are in life. Both
ends meet. Tantalising for the poor dead. Smell of grilled beefsteaks to
the starving. Gnawing their vitals. Desire to grig people. Molly wanting
to do it at the window. Eight children he has anyway.

He has seen a fair share go under in his time, lying around him field
after field. Holy fields. More room if they buried them standing.
Sitting or kneeling you couldn't. Standing? His head might come up some
day above ground in a landslip with his hand pointing. All honeycombed
the ground must be: oblong cells. And very neat he keeps it too: trim
grass and edgings. His garden Major Gamble calls Mount Jerome. Well,
so it is. Ought to be flowers of sleep. Chinese cemeteries with giant
poppies growing produce the best opium Mastiansky told me. The Botanic
Gardens are just over there. It's the blood sinking in the earth gives
new life. Same idea those jews they said killed the christian boy. Every
man his price. Well preserved fat corpse, gentleman, epicure, invaluable
for fruit garden. A bargain. By carcass of William Wilkinson, auditor
and accountant, lately deceased, three pounds thirteen and six. With
thanks.

I daresay the soil would be quite fat with corpsemanure, bones, flesh,
nails. Charnelhouses. Dreadful. Turning green and pink decomposing. Rot
quick in damp earth. The lean old ones tougher. Then a kind of a tallowy
kind of a cheesy. Then begin to get black, black treacle oozing out of
them. Then dried up. Deathmoths. Of course the cells or whatever they
are go on living. Changing about. Live for ever practically. Nothing to
feed on feed on themselves.

But they must breed a devil of a lot of maggots. Soil must be simply
swirling with them. Your head it simply swurls. Those pretty little
seaside gurls. He looks cheerful enough over it. Gives him a sense of
power seeing all the others go under first. Wonder how he looks at life.
Cracking his jokes too: warms the cockles of his heart. The one about
the bulletin. Spurgeon went to heaven 4 a.m. this morning. 11 p.m.
(closing time). Not arrived yet. Peter. The dead themselves the men
anyhow would like to hear an odd joke or the women to know what's in
fashion. A juicy pear or ladies' punch, hot, strong and sweet. Keep
out the damp. You must laugh sometimes so better do it that way.
Gravediggers in _Hamlet_. Shows the profound knowledge of the human
heart. Daren't joke about the dead for two years at least. _De mortuis
nil nisi prius_. Go out of mourning first. Hard to imagine his funeral.
Seems a sort of a joke. Read your own obituary notice they say you live
longer. Gives you second wind. New lease of life.

--How many have-you for tomorrow? the caretaker asked.

--Two, Corny Kelleher said. Half ten and eleven.

The caretaker put the papers in his pocket. The barrow had ceased to
trundle. The mourners split and moved to each side of the hole, stepping
with care round the graves. The gravediggers bore the coffin and set its
nose on the brink, looping the bands round it.

Burying him. We come to bury Caesar. His ides of March or June. He
doesn't know who is here nor care. Now who is that lankylooking galoot
over there in the macintosh? Now who is he I'd like to know? Now I'd
give a trifle to know who he is. Always someone turns up you never
dreamt of. A fellow could live on his lonesome all his life. Yes, he
could. Still he'd have to get someone to sod him after he died though he
could dig his own grave. We all do. Only man buries. No, ants too. First
thing strikes anybody. Bury the dead. Say Robinson Crusoe was true to
life. Well then Friday buried him. Every Friday buries a Thursday if you
come to look at it.

     _O, poor Robinson Crusoe!
     How could you possibly do so?_

Poor Dignam! His last lie on the earth in his box. When you think of
them all it does seem a waste of wood. All gnawed through. They could
invent a handsome bier with a kind of panel sliding, let it down that
way. Ay but they might object to be buried out of another fellow's.
They're so particular. Lay me in my native earth. Bit of clay from
the holy land. Only a mother and deadborn child ever buried in the one
coffin. I see what it means. I see. To protect him as long as possible
even in the earth. The Irishman's house is his coffin. Embalming in
catacombs, mummies the same idea.

Mr Bloom stood far back, his hat in his hand, counting the bared heads.
Twelve. I'm thirteen. No. The chap in the macintosh is thirteen. Death's
number. Where the deuce did he pop out of? He wasn't in the chapel, that
I'll swear. Silly superstition that about thirteen.

Nice soft tweed Ned Lambert has in that suit. Tinge of purple. I had
one like that when we lived in Lombard street west. Dressy fellow he was
once. Used to change three suits in the day. Must get that grey suit
of mine turned by Mesias. Hello. It's dyed. His wife I forgot he's not
married or his landlady ought to have picked out those threads for him.

The coffin dived out of sight, eased down by the men straddled on the
gravetrestles. They struggled up and out: and all uncovered. Twenty.

Pause.

If we were all suddenly somebody else.

Far away a donkey brayed. Rain. No such ass. Never see a dead one, they
say. Shame of death. They hide. Also poor papa went away.

Gentle sweet air blew round the bared heads in a whisper. Whisper. The
boy by the gravehead held his wreath with both hands staring quietly in
the black open space. Mr Bloom moved behind the portly kindly caretaker.
Wellcut frockcoat. Weighing them up perhaps to see which will go next.
Well, it is a long rest. Feel no more. It's the moment you feel. Must be
damned unpleasant. Can't believe it at first. Mistake must be: someone
else. Try the house opposite. Wait, I wanted to. I haven't yet. Then
darkened deathchamber. Light they want. Whispering around you. Would you
like to see a priest? Then rambling and wandering. Delirium all you hid
all your life. The death struggle. His sleep is not natural. Press his
lower eyelid. Watching is his nose pointed is his jaw sinking are the
soles of his feet yellow. Pull the pillow away and finish it off on the
floor since he's doomed. Devil in that picture of sinner's death showing
him a woman. Dying to embrace her in his shirt. Last act of _Lucia.
Shall i nevermore behold thee_? Bam! He expires. Gone at last. People
talk about you a bit: forget you. Don't forget to pray for him. Remember
him in your prayers. Even Parnell. Ivy day dying out. Then they follow:
dropping into a hole, one after the other.

We are praying now for the repose of his soul. Hoping you're well and
not in hell. Nice change of air. Out of the fryingpan of life into the
fire of purgatory.

Does he ever think of the hole waiting for himself? They say you do when
you shiver in the sun. Someone walking over it. Callboy's warning. Near
you. Mine over there towards Finglas, the plot I bought. Mamma, poor
mamma, and little Rudy.

The gravediggers took up their spades and flung heavy clods of clay in
on the coffin. Mr Bloom turned away his face. And if he was alive all
the time? Whew! By jingo, that would be awful! No, no: he is dead, of
course. Of course he is dead. Monday he died. They ought to have
some law to pierce the heart and make sure or an electric clock or
a telephone in the coffin and some kind of a canvas airhole. Flag of
distress. Three days. Rather long to keep them in summer. Just as well
to get shut of them as soon as you are sure there's no.

The clay fell softer. Begin to be forgotten. Out of sight, out of mind.

The caretaker moved away a few paces and put on his hat. Had enough of
it. The mourners took heart of grace, one by one, covering themselves
without show. Mr Bloom put on his hat and saw the portly figure make its
way deftly through the maze of graves. Quietly, sure of his ground, he
traversed the dismal fields.

Hynes jotting down something in his notebook. Ah, the names. But he
knows them all. No: coming to me.

--I am just taking the names, Hynes said below his breath. What is your
christian name? I'm not sure.

--L, Mr Bloom said. Leopold. And you might put down M'Coy's name too. He
asked me to.

--Charley, Hynes said writing. I know. He was on the _Freeman_ once.

So he was before he got the job in the morgue under Louis Byrne. Good
idea a postmortem for doctors. Find out what they imagine they know.
He died of a Tuesday. Got the run. Levanted with the cash of a few ads.
Charley, you're my darling. That was why he asked me to. O well, does
no harm. I saw to that, M'Coy. Thanks, old chap: much obliged. Leave him
under an obligation: costs nothing.

--And tell us, Hynes said, do you know that fellow in the, fellow was
over there in the...

He looked around.

--Macintosh. Yes, I saw him, Mr Bloom said. Where is he now?

--M'Intosh, Hynes said scribbling. I don't know who he is. Is that his
name?

He moved away, looking about him.

--No, Mr Bloom began, turning and stopping. I say, Hynes!

Didn't hear. What? Where has he disappeared to? Not a sign. Well of all
the. Has anybody here seen? Kay ee double ell. Become invisible. Good
Lord, what became of him?

A seventh gravedigger came beside Mr Bloom to take up an idle spade.

--O, excuse me!

He stepped aside nimbly.

Clay, brown, damp, began to be seen in the hole. It rose. Nearly over.
A mound of damp clods rose more, rose, and the gravediggers rested their
spades. All uncovered again for a few instants. The boy propped
his wreath against a corner: the brother-in-law his on a lump. The
gravediggers put on their caps and carried their earthy spades towards
the barrow. Then knocked the blades lightly on the turf: clean. One bent
to pluck from the haft a long tuft of grass. One, leaving his mates,
walked slowly on with shouldered weapon, its blade blueglancing.
Silently at the gravehead another coiled the coffinband. His navelcord.
The brother-in-law, turning away, placed something in his free hand.
Thanks in silence. Sorry, sir: trouble. Headshake. I know that. For
yourselves just.

The mourners moved away slowly without aim, by devious paths, staying at
whiles to read a name on a tomb.

--Let us go round by the chief's grave, Hynes said. We have time.

--Let us, Mr Power said.

They turned to the right, following their slow thoughts. With awe Mr
Power's blank voice spoke:

--Some say he is not in that grave at all. That the coffin was filled
with stones. That one day he will come again.

Hynes shook his head.

--Parnell will never come again, he said. He's there, all that was
mortal of him. Peace to his ashes.

Mr Bloom walked unheeded along his grove by saddened angels, crosses,
broken pillars, family vaults, stone hopes praying with upcast eyes,
old Ireland's hearts and hands. More sensible to spend the money on some
charity for the living. Pray for the repose of the soul of. Does anybody
really? Plant him and have done with him. Like down a coalshoot. Then
lump them together to save time. All souls' day. Twentyseventh I'll be
at his grave. Ten shillings for the gardener. He keeps it free of weeds.
Old man himself. Bent down double with his shears clipping. Near death's
door. Who passed away. Who departed this life. As if they did it of
their own accord. Got the shove, all of them. Who kicked the
bucket. More interesting if they told you what they were. So and So,
wheelwright. I travelled for cork lino. I paid five shillings in the
pound. Or a woman's with her saucepan. I cooked good Irish stew.
Eulogy in a country churchyard it ought to be that poem of whose is it
Wordsworth or Thomas Campbell. Entered into rest the protestants put it.
Old Dr Murren's. The great physician called him home. Well it's God's
acre for them. Nice country residence. Newly plastered and painted.
Ideal spot to have a quiet smoke and read the _Church Times._ Marriage
ads they never try to beautify. Rusty wreaths hung on knobs, garlands of
bronzefoil. Better value that for the money. Still, the flowers are more
poetical. The other gets rather tiresome, never withering. Expresses
nothing. Immortelles.

A bird sat tamely perched on a poplar branch. Like stuffed. Like the
wedding present alderman Hooper gave us. Hoo! Not a budge out of him.
Knows there are no catapults to let fly at him. Dead animal even sadder.
Silly-Milly burying the little dead bird in the kitchen matchbox, a
daisychain and bits of broken chainies on the grave.

The Sacred Heart that is: showing it. Heart on his sleeve. Ought to be
sideways and red it should be painted like a real heart. Ireland was
dedicated to it or whatever that. Seems anything but pleased. Why this
infliction? Would birds come then and peck like the boy with the basket
of fruit but he said no because they ought to have been afraid of the
boy. Apollo that was.

How many! All these here once walked round Dublin. Faithful departed. As
you are now so once were we.

Besides how could you remember everybody? Eyes, walk, voice. Well, the
voice, yes: gramophone. Have a gramophone in every grave or keep it in
the house. After dinner on a Sunday. Put on poor old greatgrandfather.
Kraahraark! Hellohellohello amawfullyglad kraark awfullygladaseeagain
hellohello amawf krpthsth. Remind you of the voice like the photograph
reminds you of the face. Otherwise you couldn't remember the face after
fifteen years, say. For instance who? For instance some fellow that died
when I was in Wisdom Hely's.

Rtststr! A rattle of pebbles. Wait. Stop!

He looked down intently into a stone crypt. Some animal. Wait. There he
goes.

An obese grey rat toddled along the side of the crypt, moving the
pebbles. An old stager: greatgrandfather: he knows the ropes. The grey
alive crushed itself in under the plinth, wriggled itself in under it.
Good hidingplace for treasure.

Who lives there? Are laid the remains of Robert Emery. Robert Emmet was
buried here by torchlight, wasn't he? Making his rounds.

Tail gone now.

One of those chaps would make short work of a fellow. Pick the bones
clean no matter who it was. Ordinary meat for them. A corpse is meat
gone bad. Well and what's cheese? Corpse of milk. I read in that
_Voyages in China_ that the Chinese say a white man smells like a
corpse. Cremation better. Priests dead against it. Devilling for the
other firm. Wholesale burners and Dutch oven dealers. Time of the
plague. Quicklime feverpits to eat them. Lethal chamber. Ashes to ashes.
Or bury at sea. Where is that Parsee tower of silence? Eaten by birds.
Earth, fire, water. Drowning they say is the pleasantest. See your whole
life in a flash. But being brought back to life no. Can't bury in the
air however. Out of a flying machine. Wonder does the news go about
whenever a fresh one is let down. Underground communication. We learned
that from them. Wouldn't be surprised. Regular square feed for them.
Flies come before he's well dead. Got wind of Dignam. They wouldn't care
about the smell of it. Saltwhite crumbling mush of corpse: smell, taste
like raw white turnips.

The gates glimmered in front: still open. Back to the world again.
Enough of this place. Brings you a bit nearer every time. Last time I
was here was Mrs Sinico's funeral. Poor papa too. The love that kills.
And even scraping up the earth at night with a lantern like that case
I read of to get at fresh buried females or even putrefied with running
gravesores. Give you the creeps after a bit. I will appear to you after
death. You will see my ghost after death. My ghost will haunt you after
death. There is another world after death named hell. I do not like that
other world she wrote. No more do I. Plenty to see and hear and feel
yet. Feel live warm beings near you. Let them sleep in their maggoty
beds. They are not going to get me this innings. Warm beds: warm
fullblooded life.

Martin Cunningham emerged from a sidepath, talking gravely.

Solicitor, I think. I know his face. Menton, John Henry, solicitor,
commissioner for oaths and affidavits. Dignam used to be in his office.
Mat Dillon's long ago. Jolly Mat. Convivial evenings. Cold fowl, cigars,
the Tantalus glasses. Heart of gold really. Yes, Menton. Got his rag out
that evening on the bowlinggreen because I sailed inside him. Pure fluke
of mine: the bias. Why he took such a rooted dislike to me. Hate
at first sight. Molly and Floey Dillon linked under the lilactree,
laughing. Fellow always like that, mortified if women are by.

Got a dinge in the side of his hat. Carriage probably.

--Excuse me, sir, Mr Bloom said beside them.

They stopped.

--Your hat is a little crushed, Mr Bloom said pointing.

John Henry Menton stared at him for an instant without moving.

--There, Martin Cunningham helped, pointing also. John Henry Menton took
off his hat, bulged out the dinge and smoothed the nap with care on his
coatsleeve. He clapped the hat on his head again.

--It's all right now, Martin Cunningham said.

John Henry Menton jerked his head down in acknowledgment.

--Thank you, he said shortly.

They walked on towards the gates. Mr Bloom, chapfallen, drew behind
a few paces so as not to overhear. Martin laying down the law. Martin
could wind a sappyhead like that round his little finger, without his
seeing it.

Oyster eyes. Never mind. Be sorry after perhaps when it dawns on him.
Get the pull over him that way.

Thank you. How grand we are this morning!


IN THE HEART OF THE HIBERNIAN METROPOLIS


Before Nelson's pillar trams slowed, shunted, changed trolley, started
for Blackrock, Kingstown and Dalkey, Clonskea, Rathgar and Terenure,
Palmerston Park and upper Rathmines, Sandymount Green, Rathmines,
Ringsend and Sandymount Tower, Harold's Cross. The hoarse Dublin United
Tramway Company's timekeeper bawled them off:

--Rathgar and Terenure!

--Come on, Sandymount Green!

Right and left parallel clanging ringing a doubledecker and a singledeck
moved from their railheads, swerved to the down line, glided parallel.

--Start, Palmerston Park!


THE WEARER OF THE CROWN


Under the porch of the general post office shoeblacks called and
polished. Parked in North Prince's street His Majesty's vermilion
mailcars, bearing on their sides the royal initials, E. R., received
loudly flung sacks of letters, postcards, lettercards, parcels, insured
and paid, for local, provincial, British and overseas delivery.

GENTLEMEN OF THE PRESS


Grossbooted draymen rolled barrels dullthudding out of Prince's stores
and bumped them up on the brewery float. On the brewery float bumped
dullthudding barrels rolled by grossbooted draymen out of Prince's
stores.

--There it is, Red Murray said. Alexander Keyes.

--Just cut it out, will you? Mr Bloom said, and I'll take it round to
the _Telegraph_ office.

The door of Ruttledge's office creaked again. Davy Stephens, minute in a
large capecoat, a small felt hat crowning his ringlets, passed out with
a roll of papers under his cape, a king's courier.

Red Murray's long shears sliced out the advertisement from the newspaper
in four clean strokes. Scissors and paste.

--I'll go through the printingworks, Mr Bloom said, taking the cut
square.

--Of course, if he wants a par, Red Murray said earnestly, a pen behind
his ear, we can do him one.

--Right, Mr Bloom said with a nod. I'll rub that in.

We.

WILLIAM BRAYDEN, ESQUIRE, OF OAKLANDS, SANDYMOUNT


Red Murray touched Mr Bloom's arm with the shears and whispered:

--Brayden.

Mr Bloom turned and saw the liveried porter raise his lettered cap as a
stately figure entered between the newsboards of the _Weekly Freeman
and National Press_ and the _Freeman's Journal and National Press_.
Dullthudding Guinness's barrels. It passed statelily up the staircase,
steered by an umbrella, a solemn beardframed face. The broadcloth back
ascended each step: back. All his brains are in the nape of his neck,
Simon Dedalus says. Welts of flesh behind on him. Fat folds of neck,
fat, neck, fat, neck.

--Don't you think his face is like Our Saviour? Red Murray whispered.

The door of Ruttledge's office whispered: ee: cree. They always build
one door opposite another for the wind to. Way in. Way out.

Our Saviour: beardframed oval face: talking in the dusk. Mary, Martha.
Steered by an umbrella sword to the footlights: Mario the tenor.

--Or like Mario, Mr Bloom said.

--Yes, Red Murray agreed. But Mario was said to be the picture of Our
Saviour.

Jesusmario with rougy cheeks, doublet and spindle legs. Hand on his
heart. In _Martha._

     _Co-ome thou lost one,
     Co-ome thou dear one!_

THE CROZIER AND THE PEN


--His grace phoned down twice this morning, Red Murray said gravely.

They watched the knees, legs, boots vanish. Neck.

A telegram boy stepped in nimbly, threw an envelope on the counter and
stepped off posthaste with a word:

_--Freeman!_

Mr Bloom said slowly:

--Well, he is one of our saviours also.

A meek smile accompanied him as he lifted the counterflap, as he passed
in through a sidedoor and along the warm dark stairs and passage,
along the now reverberating boards. But will he save the circulation?
Thumping. Thumping.

He pushed in the glass swingdoor and entered, stepping over strewn
packing paper. Through a lane of clanking drums he made his way towards
Nannetti's reading closet.

WITH UNFEIGNED REGRET IT IS WE ANNOUNCE THE DISSOLUTION OF A MOST
RESPECTED DUBLIN BURGESS


Hynes here too: account of the funeral probably. Thumping. Thump. This
morning the remains of the late Mr Patrick Dignam. Machines. Smash a man
to atoms if they got him caught. Rule the world today. His machineries
are pegging away too. Like these, got out of hand: fermenting. Working
away, tearing away. And that old grey rat tearing to get in.

HOW A GREAT DAILY ORGAN IS TURNED OUT


Mr Bloom halted behind the foreman's spare body, admiring a glossy
crown.

Strange he never saw his real country. Ireland my country. Member for
College green. He boomed that workaday worker tack for all it was worth.
It's the ads and side features sell a weekly, not the stale news in the
official gazette. Queen Anne is dead. Published by authority in the year
one thousand and. Demesne situate in the townland of Rosenallis, barony
of Tinnahinch. To all whom it may concern schedule pursuant to statute
showing return of number of mules and jennets exported from Ballina.
Nature notes. Cartoons. Phil Blake's weekly Pat and Bull story. Uncle
Toby's page for tiny tots. Country bumpkin's queries. Dear Mr Editor,
what is a good cure for flatulence? I'd like that part. Learn a lot
teaching others. The personal note. M. A. P. Mainly all pictures.
Shapely bathers on golden strand. World's biggest balloon. Double
marriage of sisters celebrated. Two bridegrooms laughing heartily at
each other. Cuprani too, printer. More Irish than the Irish.

The machines clanked in threefour time. Thump, thump, thump. Now if he
got paralysed there and no-one knew how to stop them they'd clank on and
on the same, print it over and over and up and back. Monkeydoodle the
whole thing. Want a cool head.

--Well, get it into the evening edition, councillor, Hynes said.

Soon be calling him my lord mayor. Long John is backing him, they say.

The foreman, without answering, scribbled press on a corner of the sheet
and made a sign to a typesetter. He handed the sheet silently over the
dirty glass screen.

--Right: thanks, Hynes said moving off.

Mr Bloom stood in his way.

--If you want to draw the cashier is just going to lunch, he said,
pointing backward with his thumb.

--Did you? Hynes asked.

--Mm, Mr Bloom said. Look sharp and you'll catch him.

--Thanks, old man, Hynes said. I'll tap him too.

He hurried on eagerly towards the _Freeman's Journal_.

Three bob I lent him in Meagher's. Three weeks. Third hint.

WE SEE THE CANVASSER AT WORK


Mr Bloom laid his cutting on Mr Nannetti's desk.

--Excuse me, councillor, he said. This ad, you see. Keyes, you remember?

Mr Nannetti considered the cutting awhile and nodded.

--He wants it in for July, Mr Bloom said.

The foreman moved his pencil towards it.

--But wait, Mr Bloom said. He wants it changed. Keyes, you see. He wants
two keys at the top.

Hell of a racket they make. He doesn't hear it. Nannan. Iron nerves.
Maybe he understands what I.

The foreman turned round to hear patiently and, lifting an elbow, began
to scratch slowly in the armpit of his alpaca jacket.

--Like that, Mr Bloom said, crossing his forefingers at the top.

Let him take that in first.

Mr Bloom, glancing sideways up from the cross he had made, saw the
foreman's sallow face, think he has a touch of jaundice, and beyond the
obedient reels feeding in huge webs of paper. Clank it. Clank it. Miles
of it unreeled. What becomes of it after? O, wrap up meat, parcels:
various uses, thousand and one things.

Slipping his words deftly into the pauses of the clanking he drew
swiftly on the scarred woodwork.

HOUSE OF KEY(E)S


--Like that, see. Two crossed keys here. A circle. Then here the name.
Alexander Keyes, tea, wine and spirit merchant. So on.

Better not teach him his own business.

--You know yourself, councillor, just what he wants. Then round the top
in leaded: the house of keys. You see? Do you think that's a good idea?

The foreman moved his scratching hand to his lower ribs and scratched
there quietly.

--The idea, Mr Bloom said, is the house of keys. You know, councillor,
the Manx parliament. Innuendo of home rule. Tourists, you know, from the
isle of Man. Catches the eye, you see. Can you do that?

I could ask him perhaps about how to pronounce that _voglio._ But then
if he didn't know only make it awkward for him. Better not.

--We can do that, the foreman said. Have you the design?

--I can get it, Mr Bloom said. It was in a Kilkenny paper. He has a
house there too. I'll just run out and ask him. Well, you can do that
and just a little par calling attention. You know the usual. Highclass
licensed premises. Longfelt want. So on.

The foreman thought for an instant.

--We can do that, he said. Let him give us a three months' renewal.

A typesetter brought him a limp galleypage. He began to check it
silently. Mr Bloom stood by, hearing the loud throbs of cranks, watching
the silent typesetters at their cases.

ORTHOGRAPHICAL


Want to be sure of his spelling. Proof fever. Martin Cunningham forgot
to give us his spellingbee conundrum this morning. It is amusing to view
the unpar one ar alleled embarra two ars is it? double ess ment of a
harassed pedlar while gauging au the symmetry with a y of a peeled pear
under a cemetery wall. Silly, isn't it? Cemetery put in of course on
account of the symmetry.

I should have said when he clapped on his topper. Thank you. I ought
to have said something about an old hat or something. No. I could have
said. Looks as good as new now. See his phiz then.

Sllt. The nethermost deck of the first machine jogged forward its
flyboard with sllt the first batch of quirefolded papers. Sllt. Almost
human the way it sllt to call attention. Doing its level best to speak.
That door too sllt creaking, asking to be shut. Everything speaks in its
own way. Sllt.

NOTED CHURCHMAN AN OCCASIONAL CONTRIBUTOR


The foreman handed back the galleypage suddenly, saying:

--Wait. Where's the archbishop's letter? It's to be repeated in the
_Telegraph._ Where's what's his name?

He looked about him round his loud unanswering machines.

--Monks, sir? a voice asked from the castingbox.

--Ay. Where's Monks?

--Monks!

Mr Bloom took up his cutting. Time to get out.

--Then I'll get the design, Mr Nannetti, he said, and you'll give it a
good place I know.

--Monks!

--Yes, sir.

Three months' renewal. Want to get some wind off my chest first. Try it
anyhow. Rub in August: good idea: horseshow month. Ballsbridge. Tourists
over for the show.

A DAYFATHER


He walked on through the caseroom passing an old man, bowed, spectacled,
aproned. Old Monks, the dayfather. Queer lot of stuff he must have put
through his hands in his time: obituary notices, pubs' ads, speeches,
divorce suits, found drowned. Nearing the end of his tether now. Sober
serious man with a bit in the savingsbank I'd say. Wife a good cook and
washer. Daughter working the machine in the parlour. Plain Jane, no damn
nonsense. AND IT WAS THE FEAST OF THE PASSOVER


He stayed in his walk to watch a typesetter neatly distributing type.
Reads it backwards first. Quickly he does it. Must require some practice
that. mangiD kcirtaP. Poor papa with his hagadah book, reading backwards
with his finger to me. Pessach. Next year in Jerusalem. Dear, O dear!
All that long business about that brought us out of the land of Egypt
and into the house of bondage _Alleluia. Shema Israel Adonai Elohenu_.
No, that's the other. Then the twelve brothers, Jacob's sons. And then
the lamb and the cat and the dog and the stick and the water and the
butcher. And then the angel of death kills the butcher and he kills the
ox and the dog kills the cat. Sounds a bit silly till you come to look
into it well. Justice it means but it's everybody eating everyone else.
That's what life is after all. How quickly he does that job. Practice
makes perfect. Seems to see with his fingers.

Mr Bloom passed on out of the clanking noises through the gallery on to
the landing. Now am I going to tram it out all the way and then catch
him out perhaps. Better phone him up first. Number? Yes. Same as
Citron's house. Twentyeight. Twentyeight double four.

ONLY ONCE MORE THAT SOAP


He went down the house staircase. Who the deuce scrawled all over those
walls with matches? Looks as if they did it for a bet. Heavy greasy
smell there always is in those works. Lukewarm glue in Thom's next door
when I was there.

He took out his handkerchief to dab his nose. Citronlemon? Ah, the soap
I put there. Lose it out of that pocket. Putting back his handkerchief
he took out the soap and stowed it away, buttoned, into the hip pocket
of his trousers.

What perfume does your wife use? I could go home still: tram: something
I forgot. Just to see: before: dressing. No. Here. No.

A sudden screech of laughter came from the _Evening Telegraph_ office.
Know who that is. What's up? Pop in a minute to phone. Ned Lambert it
is.

He entered softly.

ERIN, GREEN GEM OF THE SILVER SEA


--The ghost walks, professor MacHugh murmured softly, biscuitfully to
the dusty windowpane.

Mr Dedalus, staring from the empty fireplace at Ned Lambert's quizzing
face, asked of it sourly:

--Agonising Christ, wouldn't it give you a heartburn on your arse?

Ned Lambert, seated on the table, read on:

--_Or again, note the meanderings of some purling rill as it babbles
on its way, tho' quarrelling with the stony obstacles, to the tumbling
waters of Neptune's blue domain, 'mid mossy banks, fanned by gentlest
zephyrs, played on by the glorious sunlight or 'neath the shadows cast
o'er its pensive bosom by the overarching leafage of the giants of
the forest_. What about that, Simon? he asked over the fringe of his
newspaper. How's that for high?

--Changing his drink, Mr Dedalus said.

Ned Lambert, laughing, struck the newspaper on his knees, repeating:

--_The pensive bosom and the overarsing leafage_. O boys! O boys!

--And Xenophon looked upon Marathon, Mr Dedalus said, looking again on
the fireplace and to the window, and Marathon looked on the sea.

--That will do, professor MacHugh cried from the window. I don't want to
hear any more of the stuff.

He ate off the crescent of water biscuit he had been nibbling and,
hungered, made ready to nibble the biscuit in his other hand.

High falutin stuff. Bladderbags. Ned Lambert is taking a day off I see.
Rather upsets a man's day, a funeral does. He has influence they
say. Old Chatterton, the vicechancellor, is his granduncle or his
greatgranduncle. Close on ninety they say. Subleader for his death
written this long time perhaps. Living to spite them. Might go first
himself. Johnny, make room for your uncle. The right honourable Hedges
Eyre Chatterton. Daresay he writes him an odd shaky cheque or two on
gale days. Windfall when he kicks out. Alleluia.

--Just another spasm, Ned Lambert said.

--What is it? Mr Bloom asked.

--A recently discovered fragment of Cicero, professor MacHugh answered
with pomp of tone. _Our lovely land_. SHORT BUT TO THE POINT


--Whose land? Mr Bloom said simply.

--Most pertinent question, the professor said between his chews. With an
accent on the whose.

--Dan Dawson's land Mr Dedalus said.

--Is it his speech last night? Mr Bloom asked.

Ned Lambert nodded.

--But listen to this, he said.

The doorknob hit Mr Bloom in the small of the back as the door was
pushed in.

--Excuse me, J. J. O'Molloy said, entering.

Mr Bloom moved nimbly aside.

--I beg yours, he said.

--Good day, Jack.

--Come in. Come in.

--Good day.

--How are you, Dedalus?

--Well. And yourself?

J. J. O'Molloy shook his head.

SAD


Cleverest fellow at the junior bar he used to be. Decline, poor chap.
That hectic flush spells finis for a man. Touch and go with him. What's
in the wind, I wonder. Money worry.

--_Or again if we but climb the serried mountain peaks._

--You're looking extra.

--Is the editor to be seen? J. J. O'Molloy asked, looking towards the
inner door.

--Very much so, professor MacHugh said. To be seen and heard. He's in
his sanctum with Lenehan.

J. J. O'Molloy strolled to the sloping desk and began to turn back the
pink pages of the file.

Practice dwindling. A mighthavebeen. Losing heart. Gambling. Debts of
honour. Reaping the whirlwind. Used to get good retainers from D. and T.
Fitzgerald. Their wigs to show the grey matter. Brains on their sleeve
like the statue in Glasnevin. Believe he does some literary work for the
_Express_ with Gabriel Conroy. Wellread fellow. Myles Crawford began
on the _Independent._ Funny the way those newspaper men veer about when
they get wind of a new opening. Weathercocks. Hot and cold in the same
breath. Wouldn't know which to believe. One story good till you hear
the next. Go for one another baldheaded in the papers and then all blows
over. Hail fellow well met the next moment.

--Ah, listen to this for God' sake, Ned Lambert pleaded. _Or again if we
but climb the serried mountain peaks..._

--Bombast! the professor broke in testily. Enough of the inflated
windbag!

--_Peaks_, Ned Lambert went on, _towering high on high, to bathe our
souls, as it were..._

--Bathe his lips, Mr Dedalus said. Blessed and eternal God! Yes? Is he
taking anything for it?

_--As 'twere, in the peerless panorama of Ireland's portfolio,
unmatched, despite their wellpraised prototypes in other vaunted prize
regions, for very beauty, of bosky grove and undulating plain and
luscious pastureland of vernal green, steeped in the transcendent
translucent glow of our mild mysterious Irish twilight..._

HIS NATIVE DORIC


--The moon, professor MacHugh said. He forgot Hamlet.

_--That mantles the vista far and wide and wait till the glowing orb of
the moon shine forth to irradiate her silver effulgence..._

--O! Mr Dedalus cried, giving vent to a hopeless groan. Shite and
onions! That'll do, Ned. Life is too short.

He took off his silk hat and, blowing out impatiently his bushy
moustache, welshcombed his hair with raking fingers.

Ned Lambert tossed the newspaper aside, chuckling with delight. An
instant after a hoarse bark of laughter burst over professor MacHugh's
unshaven blackspectacled face.

--Doughy Daw! he cried.

WHAT WETHERUP SAID


All very fine to jeer at it now in cold print but it goes down like hot
cake that stuff. He was in the bakery line too, wasn't he? Why they call
him Doughy Daw. Feathered his nest well anyhow. Daughter engaged to that
chap in the inland revenue office with the motor. Hooked that nicely.
Entertainments. Open house. Big blowout. Wetherup always said that. Get
a grip of them by the stomach.

The inner door was opened violently and a scarlet beaked face, crested
by a comb of feathery hair, thrust itself in. The bold blue eyes stared
about them and the harsh voice asked:

--What is it?

--And here comes the sham squire himself! professor MacHugh said
grandly.

--Getonouthat, you bloody old pedagogue! the editor said in recognition.

--Come, Ned, Mr Dedalus said, putting on his hat. I must get a drink
after that.

--Drink! the editor cried. No drinks served before mass.

--Quite right too, Mr Dedalus said, going out. Come on, Ned.

Ned Lambert sidled down from the table. The editor's blue eyes roved
towards Mr Bloom's face, shadowed by a smile.

--Will you join us, Myles? Ned Lambert asked.

MEMORABLE BATTLES RECALLED


--North Cork militia! the editor cried, striding to the mantelpiece. We
won every time! North Cork and Spanish officers!

--Where was that, Myles? Ned Lambert asked with a reflective glance at
his toecaps.

--In Ohio! the editor shouted.

--So it was, begad, Ned Lambert agreed.

Passing out he whispered to J. J. O'Molloy:

--Incipient jigs. Sad case.

--Ohio! the editor crowed in high treble from his uplifted scarlet face.
My Ohio!

--A perfect cretic! the professor said. Long, short and long.

O, HARP EOLIAN!


He took a reel of dental floss from his waistcoat pocket and, breaking
off a piece, twanged it smartly between two and two of his resonant
unwashed teeth.

--Bingbang, bangbang.

Mr Bloom, seeing the coast clear, made for the inner door.

--Just a moment, Mr Crawford, he said. I just want to phone about an ad.

He went in.

--What about that leader this evening? professor MacHugh asked, coming
to the editor and laying a firm hand on his shoulder.

--That'll be all right, Myles Crawford said more calmly. Never you fret.
Hello, Jack. That's all right.

--Good day, Myles, J. J. O'Molloy said, letting the pages he held slip
limply back on the file. Is that Canada swindle case on today?

The telephone whirred inside.

--Twentyeight... No, twenty... Double four... Yes.

SPOT THE WINNER


Lenehan came out of the inner office with SPORT'S tissues.

--Who wants a dead cert for the Gold cup? he asked. Sceptre with O.
Madden up.

He tossed the tissues on to the table.

Screams of newsboys barefoot in the hall rushed near and the door was
flung open.

--Hush, Lenehan said. I hear feetstoops.

Professor MacHugh strode across the room and seized the cringing urchin
by the collar as the others scampered out of the hall and down the
steps. The tissues rustled up in the draught, floated softly in the air
blue scrawls and under the table came to earth.

--It wasn't me, sir. It was the big fellow shoved me, sir.

--Throw him out and shut the door, the editor said. There's a hurricane
blowing.

Lenehan began to paw the tissues up from the floor, grunting as he
stooped twice.

--Waiting for the racing special, sir, the newsboy said. It was Pat
Farrell shoved me, sir.

He pointed to two faces peering in round the doorframe.

--Him, sir.

--Out of this with you, professor MacHugh said gruffly.

He hustled the boy out and banged the door to.

J. J. O'Molloy turned the files crackingly over, murmuring, seeking:

--Continued on page six, column four.

--Yes, _Evening Telegraph_ here, Mr Bloom phoned from the inner office.
Is the boss...? Yes, _Telegraph_... To where? Aha! Which auction rooms
?... Aha! I see... Right. I'll catch him.

A COLLISION ENSUES


The bell whirred again as he rang off. He came in quickly and bumped
against Lenehan who was struggling up with the second tissue.

--_Pardon, monsieur_, Lenehan said, clutching him for an instant and
making a grimace.

--My fault, Mr Bloom said, suffering his grip. Are you hurt? I'm in a
hurry.

--Knee, Lenehan said.

He made a comic face and whined, rubbing his knee:

--The accumulation of the _anno Domini_.

--Sorry, Mr Bloom said.

He went to the door and, holding it ajar, paused. J. J. O'Molloy slapped
the heavy pages over. The noise of two shrill voices, a mouthorgan,
echoed in the bare hallway from the newsboys squatted on the doorsteps:

     _--We are the boys of Wexford
     Who fought with heart and hand._

EXIT BLOOM


--I'm just running round to Bachelor's walk, Mr Bloom said, about this
ad of Keyes's. Want to fix it up. They tell me he's round there in
Dillon's.

He looked indecisively for a moment at their faces. The editor who,
leaning against the mantelshelf, had propped his head on his hand,
suddenly stretched forth an arm amply.

--Begone! he said. The world is before you.

--Back in no time, Mr Bloom said, hurrying out.

J. J. O'Molloy took the tissues from Lenehan's hand and read them,
blowing them apart gently, without comment.

--He'll get that advertisement, the professor said, staring through his
blackrimmed spectacles over the crossblind. Look at the young scamps
after him.

--Show. Where? Lenehan cried, running to the window.

A STREET CORTEGE


Both smiled over the crossblind at the file of capering newsboys in Mr
Bloom's wake, the last zigzagging white on the breeze a mocking kite, a
tail of white bowknots.

--Look at the young guttersnipe behind him hue and cry, Lenehan said,
and you'll kick. O, my rib risible! Taking off his flat spaugs and the
walk. Small nines. Steal upon larks.

He began to mazurka in swift caricature across the floor on sliding
feet past the fireplace to J. J. O'Molloy who placed the tissues in his
receiving hands.

--What's that? Myles Crawford said with a start. Where are the other two
gone?

--Who? the professor said, turning. They're gone round to the Oval for a
drink. Paddy Hooper is there with Jack Hall. Came over last night.

--Come on then, Myles Crawford said. Where's my hat?

He walked jerkily into the office behind, parting the vent of his
jacket, jingling his keys in his back pocket. They jingled then in the
air and against the wood as he locked his desk drawer.

--He's pretty well on, professor MacHugh said in a low voice.

--Seems to be, J. J. O'Molloy said, taking out a cigarettecase in
murmuring meditation, but it is not always as it seems. Who has the most
matches?

THE CALUMET OF PEACE


He offered a cigarette to the professor and took one himself. Lenehan
promptly struck a match for them and lit their cigarettes in turn. J. J.
O'Molloy opened his case again and offered it.

--_Thanky vous_, Lenehan said, helping himself.

The editor came from the inner office, a straw hat awry on his brow. He
declaimed in song, pointing sternly at professor MacHugh:

_--'Twas rank and fame that tempted thee, 'Twas empire charmed thy
heart._

The professor grinned, locking his long lips.

--Eh? You bloody old Roman empire? Myles Crawford said.

He took a cigarette from the open case. Lenehan, lighting it for him
with quick grace, said:

--Silence for my brandnew riddle!

--_Imperium romanum_, J. J. O'Molloy said gently. It sounds nobler than
British or Brixton. The word reminds one somehow of fat in the fire.

Myles Crawford blew his first puff violently towards the ceiling.

--That's it, he said. We are the fat. You and I are the fat in the fire.
We haven't got the chance of a snowball in hell.

THE GRANDEUR THAT WAS ROME


--Wait a moment, professor MacHugh said, raising two quiet claws. We
mustn't be led away by words, by sounds of words. We think of Rome,
imperial, imperious, imperative.

He extended elocutionary arms from frayed stained shirtcuffs, pausing:

--What was their civilisation? Vast, I allow: but vile. Cloacae: sewers.
The Jews in the wilderness and on the mountaintop said: _It is meet
to be here. Let us build an altar to Jehovah_. The Roman, like the
Englishman who follows in his footsteps, brought to every new shore on
which he set his foot (on our shore he never set it) only his cloacal
obsession. He gazed about him in his toga and he said: _It is meet to be
here. Let us construct a watercloset._

--Which they accordingly did do, Lenehan said. Our old ancient
ancestors, as we read in the first chapter of Guinness's, were partial
to the running stream.

--They were nature's gentlemen, J. J. O'Molloy murmured. But we have
also Roman law.

--And Pontius Pilate is its prophet, professor MacHugh responded.

--Do you know that story about chief baron Palles? J. J. O'Molloy asked.
It was at the royal university dinner. Everything was going swimmingly
...

--First my riddle, Lenehan said. Are you ready?

Mr O'Madden Burke, tall in copious grey of Donegal tweed, came in from
the hallway. Stephen Dedalus, behind him, uncovered as he entered.

--_Entrez, mes enfants!_ Lenehan cried.

--I escort a suppliant, Mr O'Madden Burke said melodiously. Youth led by
Experience visits Notoriety.

--How do you do? the editor said, holding out a hand. Come in. Your
governor is just gone.???


Lenehan said to all:

--Silence! What opera resembles a railwayline? Reflect, ponder,
excogitate, reply.

Stephen handed over the typed sheets, pointing to the title and
signature.

--Who? the editor asked.

Bit torn off.

--Mr Garrett Deasy, Stephen said.

--That old pelters, the editor said. Who tore it? Was he short taken?

     _On swift sail flaming
     From storm and south
     He comes, pale vampire,
     Mouth to my mouth._

--Good day, Stephen, the professor said, coming to peer over their
shoulders. Foot and mouth? Are you turned...?

Bullockbefriending bard.

SHINDY IN WELLKNOWN RESTAURANT


--Good day, sir, Stephen answered blushing. The letter is not mine. Mr
Garrett Deasy asked me to...

--O, I know him, Myles Crawford said, and I knew his wife too. The
bloodiest old tartar God ever made. By Jesus, she had the foot and mouth
disease and no mistake! The night she threw the soup in the waiter's
face in the Star and Garter. Oho!

A woman brought sin into the world. For Helen, the runaway wife of
Menelaus, ten years the Greeks. O'Rourke, prince of Breffni.

--Is he a widower? Stephen asked.

--Ay, a grass one, Myles Crawford said, his eye running down the
typescript. Emperor's horses. Habsburg. An Irishman saved his life on
the ramparts of Vienna. Don't you forget! Maximilian Karl O'Donnell,
graf von Tirconnell in Ireland. Sent his heir over to make the king
an Austrian fieldmarshal now. Going to be trouble there one day. Wild
geese. O yes, every time. Don't you forget that!

--The moot point is did he forget it, J. J. O'Molloy said quietly,
turning a horseshoe paperweight. Saving princes is a thank you job.

Professor MacHugh turned on him.

--And if not? he said.

--I'll tell you how it was, Myles Crawford began. A Hungarian it was one
day... LOST CAUSES

NOBLE MARQUESS MENTIONED


--We were always loyal to lost causes, the professor said. Success for
us is the death of the intellect and of the imagination. We were never
loyal to the successful. We serve them. I teach the blatant Latin
language. I speak the tongue of a race the acme of whose mentality is
the maxim: time is money. Material domination. _Dominus!_ Lord! Where is
the spirituality? Lord Jesus? Lord Salisbury? A sofa in a westend club.
But the Greek!

KYRIE ELEISON!


A smile of light brightened his darkrimmed eyes, lengthened his long
lips.

--The Greek! he said again. _Kyrios!_ Shining word! The vowels the
Semite and the Saxon know not. _Kyrie!_ The radiance of the intellect.
I ought to profess Greek, the language of the mind. _Kyrie eleison!_ The
closetmaker and the cloacamaker will never be lords of our spirit. We
are liege subjects of the catholic chivalry of Europe that foundered at
Trafalgar and of the empire of the spirit, not an _imperium,_ that
went under with the Athenian fleets at Aegospotami. Yes, yes. They went
under. Pyrrhus, misled by an oracle, made a last attempt to retrieve the
fortunes of Greece. Loyal to a lost cause.

He strode away from them towards the window.

--They went forth to battle, Mr O'Madden Burke said greyly, but they
always fell.

--Boohoo! Lenehan wept with a little noise. Owing to a brick received in
the latter half of the _matinÃ©e_. Poor, poor, poor Pyrrhus!

He whispered then near Stephen's ear:

LENEHAN'S LIMERICK


     _There's a ponderous pundit MacHugh
     Who wears goggles of ebony hue.
     As he mostly sees double
     To wear them why trouble?
     I can't see the Joe Miller. Can you?_

In mourning for Sallust, Mulligan says. Whose mother is beastly dead.

Myles Crawford crammed the sheets into a sidepocket.

--That'll be all right, he said. I'll read the rest after. That'll be
all right.

Lenehan extended his hands in protest.

--But my riddle! he said. What opera is like a railwayline?

--Opera? Mr O'Madden Burke's sphinx face reriddled.

Lenehan announced gladly:

--_The Rose of Castile_. See the wheeze? Rows of cast steel. Gee!

He poked Mr O'Madden Burke mildly in the spleen. Mr O'Madden Burke fell
back with grace on his umbrella, feigning a gasp.

--Help! he sighed. I feel a strong weakness.

Lenehan, rising to tiptoe, fanned his face rapidly with the rustling
tissues.

The professor, returning by way of the files, swept his hand across
Stephen's and Mr O'Madden Burke's loose ties.

--Paris, past and present, he said. You look like communards.

--Like fellows who had blown up the Bastile, J. J. O'Molloy said in
quiet mockery. Or was it you shot the lord lieutenant of Finland between
you? You look as though you had done the deed. General Bobrikoff.

OMNIUM GATHERUM


--We were only thinking about it, Stephen said.

--All the talents, Myles Crawford said. Law, the classics...

--The turf, Lenehan put in.

--Literature, the press.

--If Bloom were here, the professor said. The gentle art of
advertisement.

--And Madam Bloom, Mr O'Madden Burke added. The vocal muse. Dublin's
prime favourite.

Lenehan gave a loud cough.

--Ahem! he said very softly. O, for a fresh of breath air! I caught a
cold in the park. The gate was open.

YOU CAN DO IT!


The editor laid a nervous hand on Stephen's shoulder.

--I want you to write something for me, he said. Something with a bite
in it. You can do it. I see it in your face. _In the lexicon of youth_
...

See it in your face. See it in your eye. Lazy idle little schemer.

--Foot and mouth disease! the editor cried in scornful invective. Great
nationalist meeting in Borris-in-Ossory. All balls! Bulldosing the
public! Give them something with a bite in it. Put us all into it, damn
its soul. Father, Son and Holy Ghost and Jakes M'Carthy.

--We can all supply mental pabulum, Mr O'Madden Burke said.

Stephen raised his eyes to the bold unheeding stare.

--He wants you for the pressgang, J. J. O'Molloy said.

THE GREAT GALLAHER


--You can do it, Myles Crawford repeated, clenching his hand in
emphasis. Wait a minute. We'll paralyse Europe as Ignatius Gallaher
used to say when he was on the shaughraun, doing billiardmarking in the
Clarence. Gallaher, that was a pressman for you. That was a pen. You
know how he made his mark? I'll tell you. That was the smartest piece of
journalism ever known. That was in eightyone, sixth of May, time of
the invincibles, murder in the Phoenix park, before you were born, I
suppose. I'll show you.

He pushed past them to the files.

--Look at here, he said turning. The _New York World_ cabled for a
special. Remember that time?

Professor MacHugh nodded.

--_New York World_, the editor said, excitedly pushing back his straw
hat. Where it took place. Tim Kelly, or Kavanagh I mean. Joe Brady and
the rest of them. Where Skin-the-Goat drove the car. Whole route, see?

--Skin-the-Goat, Mr O'Madden Burke said. Fitzharris. He has that
cabman's shelter, they say, down there at Butt bridge. Holohan told me.
You know Holohan?

--Hop and carry one, is it? Myles Crawford said.

--And poor Gumley is down there too, so he told me, minding stones for
the corporation. A night watchman.

Stephen turned in surprise.

--Gumley? he said. You don't say so? A friend of my father's, is it?

--Never mind Gumley, Myles Crawford cried angrily. Let Gumley mind
the stones, see they don't run away. Look at here. What did Ignatius
Gallaher do? I'll tell you. Inspiration of genius. Cabled right away.
Have you _Weekly Freeman_ of 17 March? Right. Have you got that?

He flung back pages of the files and stuck his finger on a point.

--Take page four, advertisement for Bransome's coffee, let us say. Have
you got that? Right.

The telephone whirred.

A DISTANT VOICE


--I'll answer it, the professor said, going.

--B is parkgate. Good.

His finger leaped and struck point after point, vibrating.

--T is viceregal lodge. C is where murder took place. K is Knockmaroon
gate.

The loose flesh of his neck shook like a cock's wattles. An illstarched
dicky jutted up and with a rude gesture he thrust it back into his
waistcoat.

--Hello? _Evening Telegraph_ here... Hello?... Who's there?... Yes...
Yes... Yes.

--F to P is the route Skin-the-Goat drove the car for an alibi,
Inchicore, Roundtown, Windy Arbour, Palmerston Park, Ranelagh. F.A.B.P.
Got that? X is Davy's publichouse in upper Leeson street.

The professor came to the inner door.

--Bloom is at the telephone, he said.

--Tell him go to hell, the editor said promptly. X is Davy's
publichouse, see? CLEVER, VERY


--Clever, Lenehan said. Very.

--Gave it to them on a hot plate, Myles Crawford said, the whole bloody
history.

Nightmare from which you will never awake.

--I saw it, the editor said proudly. I was present. Dick Adams, the
besthearted bloody Corkman the Lord ever put the breath of life in, and
myself.

Lenehan bowed to a shape of air, announcing:

--Madam, I'm Adam. And Able was I ere I saw Elba.

--History! Myles Crawford cried. The Old Woman of Prince's street was
there first. There was weeping and gnashing of teeth over that. Out of
an advertisement. Gregor Grey made the design for it. That gave him the
leg up. Then Paddy Hooper worked Tay Pay who took him on to the _Star._
Now he's got in with Blumenfeld. That's press. That's talent. Pyatt! He
was all their daddies!

--The father of scare journalism, Lenehan confirmed, and the
brother-in-law of Chris Callinan.

--Hello?... Are you there?... Yes, he's here still. Come across
yourself.

--Where do you find a pressman like that now, eh? the editor cried. He
flung the pages down.

--Clamn dever, Lenehan said to Mr O'Madden Burke.

--Very smart, Mr O'Madden Burke said.

Professor MacHugh came from the inner office.

--Talking about the invincibles, he said, did you see that some hawkers
were up before the recorder?

--O yes, J. J. O'Molloy said eagerly. Lady Dudley was walking home
through the park to see all the trees that were blown down by that
cyclone last year and thought she'd buy a view of Dublin. And it
turned out to be a commemoration postcard of Joe Brady or Number One or
Skin-the-Goat. Right outside the viceregal lodge, imagine!

--They're only in the hook and eye department, Myles Crawford said.
Psha! Press and the bar! Where have you a man now at the bar like those
fellows, like Whiteside, like Isaac Butt, like silvertongued O'Hagan.
Eh? Ah, bloody nonsense. Psha! Only in the halfpenny place.

His mouth continued to twitch unspeaking in nervous curls of disdain.

Would anyone wish that mouth for her kiss? How do you know? Why did you
write it then?

RHYMES AND REASONS


Mouth, south. Is the mouth south someway? Or the south a mouth? Must be
some. South, pout, out, shout, drouth. Rhymes: two men dressed the same,
looking the same, two by two.

     _........................ la tua pace
    .................. che parlar ti piace
    .... mentrechÃ© il vento, come fa, si tace._

He saw them three by three, approaching girls, in green, in rose, in
russet, entwining, _per l'aer perso_, in mauve, in purple, _quella
pacifica oriafiamma_, gold of oriflamme, _di rimirar fe piu ardenti._
But I old men, penitent, leadenfooted, underdarkneath the night: mouth
south: tomb womb.

--Speak up for yourself, Mr O'Madden Burke said.

SUFFICIENT FOR THE DAY...


J. J. O'Molloy, smiling palely, took up the gage.

--My dear Myles, he said, flinging his cigarette aside, you put a false
construction on my words. I hold no brief, as at present advised, for
the third profession qua profession but your Cork legs are running away
with you. Why not bring in Henry Grattan and Flood and Demosthenes and
Edmund Burke? Ignatius Gallaher we all know and his Chapelizod boss,
Harmsworth of the farthing press, and his American cousin of the Bowery
guttersheet not to mention _Paddy Kelly's Budget, Pue's Occurrences_
and our watchful friend _The Skibbereen Eagle_. Why bring in a master
of forensic eloquence like Whiteside? Sufficient for the day is the
newspaper thereof. LINKS WITH BYGONE DAYS OF YORE


--Grattan and Flood wrote for this very paper, the editor cried in his
face. Irish volunteers. Where are you now? Established 1763. Dr Lucas.
Who have you now like John Philpot Curran? Psha!

--Well, J. J. O'Molloy said, Bushe K.C., for example.

--Bushe? the editor said. Well, yes: Bushe, yes. He has a strain of it
in his blood. Kendal Bushe or I mean Seymour Bushe.

--He would have been on the bench long ago, the professor said, only for
... But no matter.

J. J. O'Molloy turned to Stephen and said quietly and slowly:

--One of the most polished periods I think I ever listened to in my life
fell from the lips of Seymour Bushe. It was in that case of fratricide,
the Childs murder case. Bushe defended him. _And in the porches of mine
ear did pour._


By the way how did he find that out? He died in his sleep. Or the other
story, beast with two backs?

--What was that? the professor asked.

ITALIA, MAGISTRA ARTIUM


--He spoke on the law of evidence, J. J. O'Molloy said, of Roman justice
as contrasted with the earlier Mosaic code, the _lex talionis_. And he
cited the Moses of Michelangelo in the vatican.

--Ha.

--A few wellchosen words, Lenehan prefaced. Silence!

Pause. J. J. O'Molloy took out his cigarettecase.

False lull. Something quite ordinary.

Messenger took out his matchbox thoughtfully and lit his cigar.

I have often thought since on looking back over that strange time that
it was that small act, trivial in itself, that striking of that match,
that determined the whole aftercourse of both our lives. A POLISHED
PERIOD


J. J. O'Molloy resumed, moulding his words:

--He said of it: _that stony effigy in frozen music, horned and
terrible, of the human form divine, that eternal symbol of wisdom and
of prophecy which, if aught that the imagination or the hand of sculptor
has wrought in marble of soultransfigured and of soultransfiguring
deserves to live, deserves to live._

His slim hand with a wave graced echo and fall.

--Fine! Myles Crawford said at once.

--The divine afflatus, Mr O'Madden Burke said.

--You like it? J. J. O'Molloy asked Stephen.

Stephen, his blood wooed by grace of language and gesture, blushed. He
took a cigarette from the case. J. J. O'Molloy offered his case to Myles
Crawford. Lenehan lit their cigarettes as before and took his trophy,
saying:

--Muchibus thankibus.

A MAN OF HIGH MORALE


--Professor Magennis was speaking to me about you, J. J. O'Molloy said
to Stephen. What do you think really of that hermetic crowd, the opal
hush poets: A. E. the mastermystic? That Blavatsky woman started it.
She was a nice old bag of tricks. A. E. has been telling some yankee
interviewer that you came to him in the small hours of the morning to
ask him about planes of consciousness. Magennis thinks you must have
been pulling A. E.'s leg. He is a man of the very highest morale,
Magennis.

Speaking about me. What did he say? What did he say? What did he say
about me? Don't ask.

--No, thanks, professor MacHugh said, waving the cigarettecase aside.
Wait a moment. Let me say one thing. The finest display of oratory I
ever heard was a speech made by John F Taylor at the college historical
society. Mr Justice Fitzgibbon, the present lord justice of appeal, had
spoken and the paper under debate was an essay (new for those days),
advocating the revival of the Irish tongue.

He turned towards Myles Crawford and said:

--You know Gerald Fitzgibbon. Then you can imagine the style of his
discourse.

--He is sitting with Tim Healy, J. J. O'Molloy said, rumour has it, on
the Trinity college estates commission.

--He is sitting with a sweet thing, Myles Crawford said, in a child's
frock. Go on. Well?

--It was the speech, mark you, the professor said, of a finished orator,
full of courteous haughtiness and pouring in chastened diction I will
not say the vials of his wrath but pouring the proud man's contumely
upon the new movement. It was then a new movement. We were weak,
therefore worthless.

He closed his long thin lips an instant but, eager to be on, raised
an outspanned hand to his spectacles and, with trembling thumb and
ringfinger touching lightly the black rims, steadied them to a new
focus.

IMPROMPTU


In ferial tone he addressed J. J. O'Molloy:

--Taylor had come there, you must know, from a sickbed. That he
had prepared his speech I do not believe for there was not even one
shorthandwriter in the hall. His dark lean face had a growth of shaggy
beard round it. He wore a loose white silk neckcloth and altogether he
looked (though he was not) a dying man.

His gaze turned at once but slowly from J. J. O'Molloy's towards
Stephen's face and then bent at once to the ground, seeking. His
unglazed linen collar appeared behind his bent head, soiled by his
withering hair. Still seeking, he said:

--When Fitzgibbon's speech had ended John F Taylor rose to reply.
Briefly, as well as I can bring them to mind, his words were these.

He raised his head firmly. His eyes bethought themselves once more.
Witless shellfish swam in the gross lenses to and fro, seeking outlet.

He began:

_--Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen: Great was my admiration in
listening to the remarks addressed to the youth of Ireland a moment
since by my learned friend. It seemed to me that I had been transported
into a country far away from this country, into an age remote from
this age, that I stood in ancient Egypt and that I was listening to the
speech of some highpriest of that land addressed to the youthful Moses._

His listeners held their cigarettes poised to hear, their smokes
ascending in frail stalks that flowered with his speech. _And let our
crooked smokes._ Noble words coming. Look out. Could you try your hand
at it yourself?

_--And it seemed to me that I heard the voice of that Egyptian
highpriest raised in a tone of like haughtiness and like pride. I heard
his words and their meaning was revealed to me._

FROM THE FATHERS


It was revealed to me that those things are good which yet are corrupted
which neither if they were supremely good nor unless they were good
could be corrupted. Ah, curse you! That's saint Augustine.

_--Why will you jews not accept our culture, our religion and our
language? You are a tribe of nomad herdsmen: we are a mighty people. You
have no cities nor no wealth: our cities are hives of humanity and
our galleys, trireme and quadrireme, laden with all manner merchandise
furrow the waters of the known globe. You have but emerged from
primitive conditions: we have a literature, a priesthood, an agelong
history and a polity._

Nile.

Child, man, effigy.

By the Nilebank the babemaries kneel, cradle of bulrushes: a man supple
in combat: stonehorned, stonebearded, heart of stone.

_--You pray to a local and obscure idol: our temples, majestic and
mysterious, are the abodes of Isis and Osiris, of Horus and Ammon Ra.
Yours serfdom, awe and humbleness: ours thunder and the seas. Israel
is weak and few are her children: Egypt is an host and terrible are her
arms. Vagrants and daylabourers are you called: the world trembles at
our name._

A dumb belch of hunger cleft his speech. He lifted his voice above it
boldly:

_--But, ladies and gentlemen, had the youthful Moses listened to and
accepted that view of life, had he bowed his head and bowed his will
and bowed his spirit before that arrogant admonition he would never have
brought the chosen people out of their house of bondage, nor followed
the pillar of the cloud by day. He would never have spoken with the
Eternal amid lightnings on Sinai's mountaintop nor ever have come down
with the light of inspiration shining in his countenance and bearing in
his arms the tables of the law, graven in the language of the outlaw._

He ceased and looked at them, enjoying a silence.

OMINOUS--FOR HIM!

J. J. O'Molloy said not without regret:

--And yet he died without having entered the land of promise.

--A sudden--at--the--moment--though--from--lingering--illness--often--
previously--expectorated--demise, Lenehan added. And with a great future
behind him.

The troop of bare feet was heard rushing along the hallway and pattering
up the staircase.

--That is oratory, the professor said uncontradicted. Gone with the
wind. Hosts at Mullaghmast and Tara of the kings. Miles of ears of
porches. The tribune's words, howled and scattered to the four winds.
A people sheltered within his voice. Dead noise. Akasic records of all
that ever anywhere wherever was. Love and laud him: me no more.

I have money.

--Gentlemen, Stephen said. As the next motion on the agenda paper may I
suggest that the house do now adjourn?

--You take my breath away. It is not perchance a French compliment?
Mr O'Madden Burke asked. 'Tis the hour, methinks, when the winejug,
metaphorically speaking, is most grateful in Ye ancient hostelry.

--That it be and hereby is resolutely resolved. All that are in favour
say ay, Lenehan announced. The contrary no. I declare it carried. To
which particular boosing shed?... My casting vote is: Mooney's!

He led the way, admonishing:

--We will sternly refuse to partake of strong waters, will we not? Yes,
we will not. By no manner of means.

Mr O'Madden Burke, following close, said with an ally's lunge of his
umbrella:

--Lay on, Macduff!

--Chip of the old block! the editor cried, clapping Stephen on the
shoulder. Let us go. Where are those blasted keys?

He fumbled in his pocket pulling out the crushed typesheets.

--Foot and mouth. I know. That'll be all right. That'll go in. Where are
they? That's all right.

He thrust the sheets back and went into the inner office. LET US HOPE


J. J. O'Molloy, about to follow him in, said quietly to Stephen:

--I hope you will live to see it published. Myles, one moment.

He went into the inner office, closing the door behind him.

--Come along, Stephen, the professor said. That is fine, isn't it? It
has the prophetic vision. _Fuit Ilium!_ The sack of windy Troy. Kingdoms
of this world. The masters of the Mediterranean are fellaheen today.

The first newsboy came pattering down the stairs at their heels and
rushed out into the street, yelling:

--Racing special!

Dublin. I have much, much to learn.

They turned to the left along Abbey street.

--I have a vision too, Stephen said.

--Yes? the professor said, skipping to get into step. Crawford will
follow.

Another newsboy shot past them, yelling as he ran:

--Racing special!

DEAR DIRTY DUBLIN


Dubliners.

--Two Dublin vestals, Stephen said, elderly and pious, have lived fifty
and fiftythree years in Fumbally's lane.

--Where is that? the professor asked.

--Off Blackpitts, Stephen said.

Damp night reeking of hungry dough. Against the wall. Face glistering
tallow under her fustian shawl. Frantic hearts. Akasic records. Quicker,
darlint!

On now. Dare it. Let there be life.

--They want to see the views of Dublin from the top of Nelson's pillar.
They save up three and tenpence in a red tin letterbox moneybox. They
shake out the threepenny bits and sixpences and coax out the pennies
with the blade of a knife. Two and three in silver and one and seven
in coppers. They put on their bonnets and best clothes and take their
umbrellas for fear it may come on to rain.

--Wise virgins, professor MacHugh said.

LIFE ON THE RAW


--They buy one and fourpenceworth of brawn and four slices of panloaf at
the north city diningrooms in Marlborough street from Miss Kate Collins,
proprietress... They purchase four and twenty ripe plums from a girl
at the foot of Nelson's pillar to take off the thirst of the brawn. They
give two threepenny bits to the gentleman at the turnstile and begin
to waddle slowly up the winding staircase, grunting, encouraging each
other, afraid of the dark, panting, one asking the other have you the
brawn, praising God and the Blessed Virgin, threatening to come down,
peeping at the airslits. Glory be to God. They had no idea it was that
high.

Their names are Anne Kearns and Florence MacCabe. Anne Kearns has the
lumbago for which she rubs on Lourdes water, given her by a lady who got
a bottleful from a passionist father. Florence MacCabe takes a crubeen
and a bottle of double X for supper every Saturday.

--Antithesis, the professor said nodding twice. Vestal virgins. I can
see them. What's keeping our friend?

He turned.

A bevy of scampering newsboys rushed down the steps, scattering in all
directions, yelling, their white papers fluttering. Hard after them
Myles Crawford appeared on the steps, his hat aureoling his scarlet
face, talking with J. J. O'Molloy.

--Come along, the professor cried, waving his arm.

He set off again to walk by Stephen's side. RETURN OF BLOOM


--Yes, he said. I see them.

Mr Bloom, breathless, caught in a whirl of wild newsboys near the
offices of the _Irish Catholic and Dublin Penny Journal_, called:

--Mr Crawford! A moment!

--_Telegraph_! Racing special!

--What is it? Myles Crawford said, falling back a pace.

A newsboy cried in Mr Bloom's face:

--Terrible tragedy in Rathmines! A child bit by a bellows!

INTERVIEW WITH THE EDITOR


--Just this ad, Mr Bloom said, pushing through towards the steps,
puffing, and taking the cutting from his pocket. I spoke with Mr Keyes
just now. He'll give a renewal for two months, he says. After he'll
see. But he wants a par to call attention in the _Telegraph_ too,
the Saturday pink. And he wants it copied if it's not too late I told
councillor Nannetti from the _Kilkenny People_. I can have access to
it in the national library. House of keys, don't you see? His name is
Keyes. It's a play on the name. But he practically promised he'd give
the renewal. But he wants just a little puff. What will I tell him, Mr
Crawford? K.M.A.


--Will you tell him he can kiss my arse? Myles Crawford said throwing
out his arm for emphasis. Tell him that straight from the stable.

A bit nervy. Look out for squalls. All off for a drink. Arm in arm.
Lenehan's yachting cap on the cadge beyond. Usual blarney. Wonder is
that young Dedalus the moving spirit. Has a good pair of boots on him
today. Last time I saw him he had his heels on view. Been walking in
muck somewhere. Careless chap. What was he doing in Irishtown?

--Well, Mr Bloom said, his eyes returning, if I can get the design I
suppose it's worth a short par. He'd give the ad, I think. I'll tell him
... K.M.R.I.A.


--He can kiss my royal Irish arse, Myles Crawford cried loudly over his
shoulder. Any time he likes, tell him.

While Mr Bloom stood weighing the point and about to smile he strode on
jerkily.

RAISING THE WIND


--_Nulla bona_, Jack, he said, raising his hand to his chin. I'm up to
here. I've been through the hoop myself. I was looking for a fellow to
back a bill for me no later than last week. Sorry, Jack. You must take
the will for the deed. With a heart and a half if I could raise the wind
anyhow.

J. J. O'Molloy pulled a long face and walked on silently. They caught up
on the others and walked abreast.

--When they have eaten the brawn and the bread and wiped their twenty
fingers in the paper the bread was wrapped in they go nearer to the
railings.

--Something for you, the professor explained to Myles Crawford. Two old
Dublin women on the top of Nelson's pillar.

SOME COLUMN!--THAT'S WHAT WADDLER ONE SAID


--That's new, Myles Crawford said. That's copy. Out for the waxies
Dargle. Two old trickies, what?

--But they are afraid the pillar will fall, Stephen went on. They see
the roofs and argue about where the different churches are: Rathmines'
blue dome, Adam and Eve's, saint Laurence O'Toole's. But it makes them
giddy to look so they pull up their skirts...

THOSE SLIGHTLY RAMBUNCTIOUS FEMALES


--Easy all, Myles Crawford said. No poetic licence. We're in the
archdiocese here.

--And settle down on their striped petticoats, peering up at the statue
of the onehandled adulterer.

--Onehandled adulterer! the professor cried. I like that. I see the
idea. I see what you mean.

DAMES DONATE DUBLIN'S CITS SPEEDPILLS VELOCITOUS AEROLITHS, BELIEF


--It gives them a crick in their necks, Stephen said, and they are too
tired to look up or down or to speak. They put the bag of plums between
them and eat the plums out of it, one after another, wiping off with
their handkerchiefs the plumjuice that dribbles out of their mouths and
spitting the plumstones slowly out between the railings.

He gave a sudden loud young laugh as a close. Lenehan and Mr O'Madden
Burke, hearing, turned, beckoned and led on across towards Mooney's.

--Finished? Myles Crawford said. So long as they do no worse.

SOPHIST WALLOPS HAUGHTY HELEN SQUARE ON PROBOSCIS. SPARTANS GNASH
MOLARS. ITHACANS VOW PEN IS CHAMP.


--You remind me of Antisthenes, the professor said, a disciple of
Gorgias, the sophist. It is said of him that none could tell if he were
bitterer against others or against himself. He was the son of a noble
and a bondwoman. And he wrote a book in which he took away the palm of
beauty from Argive Helen and handed it to poor Penelope.

Poor Penelope. Penelope Rich.

They made ready to cross O'Connell street.

HELLO THERE, CENTRAL!


At various points along the eight lines tramcars with motionless
trolleys stood in their tracks, bound for or from Rathmines,
Rathfarnham, Blackrock, Kingstown and Dalkey, Sandymount Green, Ringsend
and Sandymount Tower, Donnybrook, Palmerston Park and Upper Rathmines,
all still, becalmed in short circuit. Hackney cars, cabs, delivery
waggons, mailvans, private broughams, aerated mineral water floats with
rattling crates of bottles, rattled, rolled, horsedrawn, rapidly.

WHAT?--AND LIKEWISE--WHERE?


--But what do you call it? Myles Crawford asked. Where did they get the
plums?

VIRGILIAN, SAYS PEDAGOGUE. SOPHOMORE PLUMPS FOR OLD MAN MOSES.


--Call it, wait, the professor said, opening his long lips wide to
reflect. Call it, let me see. Call it: _deus nobis haec otia fecit._

--No, Stephen said. I call it _A Pisgah Sight of Palestine or the
Parable of The Plums._

--I see, the professor said.

He laughed richly.

--I see, he said again with new pleasure. Moses and the promised land.
We gave him that idea, he added to J. J. O'Molloy.

HORATIO IS CYNOSURE THIS FAIR JUNE DAY


J. J. O'Molloy sent a weary sidelong glance towards the statue and held
his peace.

--I see, the professor said.

He halted on sir John Gray's pavement island and peered aloft at Nelson
through the meshes of his wry smile.

DIMINISHED DIGITS PROVE TOO TITILLATING FOR FRISKY FRUMPS. ANNE WIMBLES,
FLO WANGLES--YET CAN YOU BLAME THEM?


--Onehandled adulterer, he said smiling grimly. That tickles me, I must
say.

--Tickled the old ones too, Myles Crawford said, if the God Almighty's
truth was known.


Pineapple rock, lemon platt, butter scotch. A sugarsticky girl
shovelling scoopfuls of creams for a christian brother. Some school
treat. Bad for their tummies. Lozenge and comfit manufacturer to His
Majesty the King. God. Save. Our. Sitting on his throne sucking red
jujubes white.


A sombre Y.M.C.A. young man, watchful among the warm sweet fumes of
Graham Lemon's, placed a throwaway in a hand of Mr Bloom.

Heart to heart talks.

Bloo... Me? No.

Blood of the Lamb.

His slow feet walked him riverward, reading. Are you saved? All are
washed in the blood of the lamb. God wants blood victim. Birth, hymen,
martyr, war, foundation of a building, sacrifice, kidney burntoffering,
druids' altars. Elijah is coming. Dr John Alexander Dowie restorer of
the church in Zion is coming.

_Is coming! Is coming!! Is coming!!! All heartily welcome._ Paying game.
Torry and Alexander last year. Polygamy. His wife will put the stopper
on that. Where was that ad some Birmingham firm the luminous crucifix.
Our Saviour. Wake up in the dead of night and see him on the wall,
hanging. Pepper's ghost idea. Iron nails ran in.


Phosphorus it must be done with. If you leave a bit of codfish for
instance. I could see the bluey silver over it. Night I went down to the
pantry in the kitchen. Don't like all the smells in it waiting to rush
out. What was it she wanted? The Malaga raisins. Thinking of Spain.
Before Rudy was born. The phosphorescence, that bluey greeny. Very good
for the brain.

From Butler's monument house corner he glanced along Bachelor's walk.
Dedalus' daughter there still outside Dillon's auctionrooms. Must be
selling off some old furniture. Knew her eyes at once from the father.
Lobbing about waiting for him. Home always breaks up when the mother
goes. Fifteen children he had. Birth every year almost. That's in their
theology or the priest won't give the poor woman the confession, the
absolution. Increase and multiply. Did you ever hear such an idea? Eat
you out of house and home. No families themselves to feed. Living on the
fat of the land. Their butteries and larders. I'd like to see them do
the black fast Yom Kippur. Crossbuns. One meal and a collation for fear
he'd collapse on the altar. A housekeeper of one of those fellows if you
could pick it out of her. Never pick it out of her. Like getting l.s.d.
out of him. Does himself well. No guests. All for number one. Watching
his water. Bring your own bread and butter. His reverence: mum's the
word.

Good Lord, that poor child's dress is in flitters. Underfed she looks
too. Potatoes and marge, marge and potatoes. It's after they feel it.
Proof of the pudding. Undermines the constitution.

As he set foot on O'Connell bridge a puffball of smoke plumed up from
the parapet. Brewery barge with export stout. England. Sea air sours it,
I heard. Be interesting some day get a pass through Hancock to see the
brewery. Regular world in itself. Vats of porter wonderful. Rats get in
too. Drink themselves bloated as big as a collie floating. Dead drunk on
the porter. Drink till they puke again like christians. Imagine drinking
that! Rats: vats. Well, of course, if we knew all the things.

Looking down he saw flapping strongly, wheeling between the gaunt
quaywalls, gulls. Rough weather outside. If I threw myself down? Reuben
J's son must have swallowed a good bellyful of that sewage. One and
eightpence too much. Hhhhm. It's the droll way he comes out with the
things. Knows how to tell a story too.

They wheeled lower. Looking for grub. Wait.

He threw down among them a crumpled paper ball. Elijah thirtytwo feet
per sec is com. Not a bit. The ball bobbed unheeded on the wake of
swells, floated under by the bridgepiers. Not such damn fools. Also the
day I threw that stale cake out of the Erin's King picked it up in the
wake fifty yards astern. Live by their wits. They wheeled, flapping.

     _The hungry famished gull
     Flaps o'er the waters dull._

That is how poets write, the similar sounds. But then Shakespeare has
no rhymes: blank verse. The flow of the language it is. The thoughts.
Solemn.


     _Hamlet, I am thy father's spirit
     Doomed for a certain time to walk the earth._
     --Two apples a penny! Two for a penny!


His gaze passed over the glazed apples serried on her stand. Australians
they must be this time of year. Shiny peels: polishes them up with a rag
or a handkerchief.

Wait. Those poor birds.

He halted again and bought from the old applewoman two Banbury cakes for
a penny and broke the brittle paste and threw its fragments down into
the Liffey. See that? The gulls swooped silently, two, then all from
their heights, pouncing on prey. Gone. Every morsel.

Aware of their greed and cunning he shook the powdery crumb from his
hands. They never expected that. Manna. Live on fish, fishy flesh they
have, all seabirds, gulls, seagoose. Swans from Anna Liffey swim down
here sometimes to preen themselves. No accounting for tastes. Wonder
what kind is swanmeat. Robinson Crusoe had to live on them.

They wheeled flapping weakly. I'm not going to throw any more. Penny
quite enough. Lot of thanks I get. Not even a caw. They spread foot and
mouth disease too. If you cram a turkey say on chestnutmeal it tastes
like that. Eat pig like pig. But then why is it that saltwater fish are
not salty? How is that?

His eyes sought answer from the river and saw a rowboat rock at anchor
on the treacly swells lazily its plastered board.

_Kino's_ 11/- _Trousers_

Good idea that. Wonder if he pays rent to the corporation. How can you
own water really? It's always flowing in a stream, never the same, which
in the stream of life we trace. Because life is a stream. All kinds of
places are good for ads. That quack doctor for the clap used to be stuck
up in all the greenhouses. Never see it now. Strictly confidential. Dr
Hy Franks. Didn't cost him a red like Maginni the dancing master self
advertisement. Got fellows to stick them up or stick them up himself for
that matter on the q. t. running in to loosen a button. Flybynight.
Just the place too. POST NO BILLS. POST 110 PILLS. Some chap with a dose
burning him.

If he...?

O!

Eh?

No... No.

No, no. I don't believe it. He wouldn't surely?

No, no.

Mr Bloom moved forward, raising his troubled eyes. Think no more about
that. After one. Timeball on the ballastoffice is down. Dunsink time.
Fascinating little book that is of sir Robert Ball's. Parallax. I never
exactly understood. There's a priest. Could ask him. Par it's Greek:
parallel, parallax. Met him pike hoses she called it till I told her
about the transmigration. O rocks!

Mr Bloom smiled O rocks at two windows of the ballastoffice. She's right
after all. Only big words for ordinary things on account of the sound.
She's not exactly witty. Can be rude too. Blurt out what I was thinking.
Still, I don't know. She used to say Ben Dollard had a base barreltone
voice. He has legs like barrels and you'd think he was singing into a
barrel. Now, isn't that wit. They used to call him big Ben. Not half as
witty as calling him base barreltone. Appetite like an albatross. Get
outside of a baron of beef. Powerful man he was at stowing away number
one Bass. Barrel of Bass. See? It all works out.

A procession of whitesmocked sandwichmen marched slowly towards him
along the gutter, scarlet sashes across their boards. Bargains. Like
that priest they are this morning: we have sinned: we have suffered. He
read the scarlet letters on their five tall white hats: H. E. L. Y. S.
Wisdom Hely's. Y lagging behind drew a chunk of bread from under his
foreboard, crammed it into his mouth and munched as he walked. Our
staple food. Three bob a day, walking along the gutters, street after
street. Just keep skin and bone together, bread and skilly. They are
not Boyl: no, M Glade's men. Doesn't bring in any business either.
I suggested to him about a transparent showcart with two smart girls
sitting inside writing letters, copybooks, envelopes, blottingpaper. I
bet that would have caught on. Smart girls writing something catch the
eye at once. Everyone dying to know what she's writing. Get twenty of
them round you if you stare at nothing. Have a finger in the pie. Women
too. Curiosity. Pillar of salt. Wouldn't have it of course because he
didn't think of it himself first. Or the inkbottle I suggested with a
false stain of black celluloid. His ideas for ads like Plumtree's potted
under the obituaries, cold meat department. You can't lick 'em. What?
Our envelopes. Hello, Jones, where are you going? Can't stop, Robinson,
I am hastening to purchase the only reliable inkeraser _Kansell,_ sold
by Hely's Ltd, 85 Dame street. Well out of that ruck I am. Devil of a
job it was collecting accounts of those convents. Tranquilla convent.
That was a nice nun there, really sweet face. Wimple suited her small
head. Sister? Sister? I am sure she was crossed in love by her eyes.
Very hard to bargain with that sort of a woman. I disturbed her at her
devotions that morning. But glad to communicate with the outside world.
Our great day, she said. Feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel. Sweet name
too: caramel. She knew I, I think she knew by the way she. If she had
married she would have changed. I suppose they really were short of
money. Fried everything in the best butter all the same. No lard for
them. My heart's broke eating dripping. They like buttering themselves
in and out. Molly tasting it, her veil up. Sister? Pat Claffey, the
pawnbroker's daughter. It was a nun they say invented barbed wire.

He crossed Westmoreland street when apostrophe S had plodded by. Rover
cycleshop. Those races are on today. How long ago is that? Year Phil
Gilligan died. We were in Lombard street west. Wait: was in Thom's.
Got the job in Wisdom Hely's year we married. Six years. Ten years ago:
ninetyfour he died yes that's right the big fire at Arnott's. Val Dillon
was lord mayor. The Glencree dinner. Alderman Robert O'Reilly emptying
the port into his soup before the flag fell. Bobbob lapping it for the
inner alderman. Couldn't hear what the band played. For what we have
already received may the Lord make us. Milly was a kiddy then. Molly
had that elephantgrey dress with the braided frogs. Mantailored with
selfcovered buttons. She didn't like it because I sprained my ankle
first day she wore choir picnic at the Sugarloaf. As if that. Old
Goodwin's tall hat done up with some sticky stuff. Flies' picnic
too. Never put a dress on her back like it. Fitted her like a glove,
shoulders and hips. Just beginning to plump it out well. Rabbitpie we
had that day. People looking after her.

Happy. Happier then. Snug little room that was with the red wallpaper.
Dockrell's, one and ninepence a dozen. Milly's tubbing night. American
soap I bought: elderflower. Cosy smell of her bathwater. Funny she
looked soaped all over. Shapely too. Now photography. Poor papa's
daguerreotype atelier he told me of. Hereditary taste.

He walked along the curbstone.

Stream of life. What was the name of that priestylooking chap was always
squinting in when he passed? Weak eyes, woman. Stopped in Citron's saint
Kevin's parade. Pen something. Pendennis? My memory is getting. Pen
...? Of course it's years ago. Noise of the trams probably. Well, if he
couldn't remember the dayfather's name that he sees every day.

Bartell d'Arcy was the tenor, just coming out then. Seeing her home
after practice. Conceited fellow with his waxedup moustache. Gave her
that song _Winds that blow from the south_.

Windy night that was I went to fetch her there was that lodge meeting on
about those lottery tickets after Goodwin's concert in the supperroom or
oakroom of the Mansion house. He and I behind. Sheet of her music blew
out of my hand against the High school railings. Lucky it didn't.
Thing like that spoils the effect of a night for her. Professor Goodwin
linking her in front. Shaky on his pins, poor old sot. His farewell
concerts. Positively last appearance on any stage. May be for months and
may be for never. Remember her laughing at the wind, her blizzard collar
up. Corner of Harcourt road remember that gust. Brrfoo! Blew up all her
skirts and her boa nearly smothered old Goodwin. She did get flushed
in the wind. Remember when we got home raking up the fire and frying up
those pieces of lap of mutton for her supper with the Chutney sauce she
liked. And the mulled rum. Could see her in the bedroom from the hearth
unclamping the busk of her stays: white.

Swish and soft flop her stays made on the bed. Always warm from her.
Always liked to let her self out. Sitting there after till near two
taking out her hairpins. Milly tucked up in beddyhouse. Happy. Happy.
That was the night...

--O, Mr Bloom, how do you do?

--O, how do you do, Mrs Breen?

--No use complaining. How is Molly those times? Haven't seen her for
ages.

--In the pink, Mr Bloom said gaily. Milly has a position down in
Mullingar, you know.

--Go away! Isn't that grand for her?

--Yes. In a photographer's there. Getting on like a house on fire. How
are all your charges?

--All on the baker's list, Mrs Breen said.

How many has she? No other in sight.

--You're in black, I see. You have no...

--No, Mr Bloom said. I have just come from a funeral.

Going to crop up all day, I foresee. Who's dead, when and what did he
die of? Turn up like a bad penny.

--O, dear me, Mrs Breen said. I hope it wasn't any near relation.

May as well get her sympathy.

--Dignam, Mr Bloom said. An old friend of mine. He died quite suddenly,
poor fellow. Heart trouble, I believe. Funeral was this morning.

_Your funeral's tomorrow While you're coming through the rye.
Diddlediddle dumdum Diddlediddle..._

--Sad to lose the old friends, Mrs Breen's womaneyes said melancholily.

Now that's quite enough about that. Just: quietly: husband.

--And your lord and master?

Mrs Breen turned up her two large eyes. Hasn't lost them anyhow.

--O, don't be talking! she said. He's a caution to rattlesnakes. He's
in there now with his lawbooks finding out the law of libel. He has me
heartscalded. Wait till I show you.

Hot mockturtle vapour and steam of newbaked jampuffs rolypoly poured
out from Harrison's. The heavy noonreek tickled the top of Mr Bloom's
gullet. Want to make good pastry, butter, best flour, Demerara sugar,
or they'd taste it with the hot tea. Or is it from her? A barefoot
arab stood over the grating, breathing in the fumes. Deaden the gnaw of
hunger that way. Pleasure or pain is it? Penny dinner. Knife and fork
chained to the table.

Opening her handbag, chipped leather. Hatpin: ought to have a guard on
those things. Stick it in a chap's eye in the tram. Rummaging. Open.
Money. Please take one. Devils if they lose sixpence. Raise Cain.
Husband barging. Where's the ten shillings I gave you on Monday? Are
you feeding your little brother's family? Soiled handkerchief:
medicinebottle. Pastille that was fell. What is she?...

--There must be a new moon out, she said. He's always bad then. Do you
know what he did last night?

Her hand ceased to rummage. Her eyes fixed themselves on him, wide in
alarm, yet smiling.

--What? Mr Bloom asked.

Let her speak. Look straight in her eyes. I believe you. Trust me.

--Woke me up in the night, she said. Dream he had, a nightmare.

Indiges.

--Said the ace of spades was walking up the stairs.

--The ace of spades! Mr Bloom said.

She took a folded postcard from her handbag.

--Read that, she said. He got it this morning.

--What is it? Mr Bloom asked, taking the card. U.P.?

--U.P.: up, she said. Someone taking a rise out of him. It's a great
shame for them whoever he is.

--Indeed it is, Mr Bloom said.

She took back the card, sighing.

--And now he's going round to Mr Menton's office. He's going to take an
action for ten thousand pounds, he says.

She folded the card into her untidy bag and snapped the catch.

Same blue serge dress she had two years ago, the nap bleaching. Seen its
best days. Wispish hair over her ears. And that dowdy toque: three old
grapes to take the harm out of it. Shabby genteel. She used to be a
tasty dresser. Lines round her mouth. Only a year or so older than
Molly.

See the eye that woman gave her, passing. Cruel. The unfair sex.

He looked still at her, holding back behind his look his discontent.
Pungent mockturtle oxtail mulligatawny. I'm hungry too. Flakes of pastry
on the gusset of her dress: daub of sugary flour stuck to her cheek.
Rhubarb tart with liberal fillings, rich fruit interior. Josie Powell
that was. In Luke Doyle's long ago. Dolphin's Barn, the charades. U.P.:
up.

Change the subject.

--Do you ever see anything of Mrs Beaufoy? Mr Bloom asked.

--Mina Purefoy? she said.

Philip Beaufoy I was thinking. Playgoers' Club. Matcham often thinks of
the masterstroke. Did I pull the chain? Yes. The last act.

--Yes.

--I just called to ask on the way in is she over it. She's in the
lying-in hospital in Holles street. Dr Horne got her in. She's three
days bad now.

--O, Mr Bloom said. I'm sorry to hear that.

--Yes, Mrs Breen said. And a houseful of kids at home. It's a very stiff
birth, the nurse told me.

---O, Mr Bloom said.

His heavy pitying gaze absorbed her news. His tongue clacked in
compassion. Dth! Dth!

--I'm sorry to hear that, he said. Poor thing! Three days! That's
terrible for her.

Mrs Breen nodded.

--She was taken bad on the Tuesday...

Mr Bloom touched her funnybone gently, warning her:

--Mind! Let this man pass.

A bony form strode along the curbstone from the river staring with a
rapt gaze into the sunlight through a heavystringed glass. Tight as a
skullpiece a tiny hat gripped his head. From his arm a folded dustcoat,
a stick and an umbrella dangled to his stride.

--Watch him, Mr Bloom said. He always walks outside the lampposts.
Watch!

--Who is he if it's a fair question? Mrs Breen asked. Is he dotty?

--His name is Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell, Mr
Bloom said smiling. Watch!

--He has enough of them, she said. Denis will be like that one of these
days.

She broke off suddenly.

--There he is, she said. I must go after him. Goodbye. Remember me to
Molly, won't you?

--I will, Mr Bloom said.

He watched her dodge through passers towards the shopfronts. Denis Breen
in skimpy frockcoat and blue canvas shoes shuffled out of Harrison's
hugging two heavy tomes to his ribs. Blown in from the bay. Like old
times. He suffered her to overtake him without surprise and thrust
his dull grey beard towards her, his loose jaw wagging as he spoke
earnestly.

Meshuggah. Off his chump.

Mr Bloom walked on again easily, seeing ahead of him in sunlight the
tight skullpiece, the dangling stickumbrelladustcoat. Going the two
days. Watch him! Out he goes again. One way of getting on in the world.
And that other old mosey lunatic in those duds. Hard time she must have
with him.

U.P.: up. I'll take my oath that's Alf Bergan or Richie Goulding. Wrote
it for a lark in the Scotch house I bet anything. Round to Menton's
office. His oyster eyes staring at the postcard. Be a feast for the
gods.

He passed the _Irish Times_. There might be other answers Iying there.
Like to answer them all. Good system for criminals. Code. At their lunch
now. Clerk with the glasses there doesn't know me. O, leave them there
to simmer. Enough bother wading through fortyfour of them. Wanted, smart
lady typist to aid gentleman in literary work. I called you naughty
darling because I do not like that other world. Please tell me what is
the meaning. Please tell me what perfume does your wife. Tell me who
made the world. The way they spring those questions on you. And the
other one Lizzie Twigg. My literary efforts have had the good fortune to
meet with the approval of the eminent poet A. E. (Mr Geo. Russell). No
time to do her hair drinking sloppy tea with a book of poetry.

Best paper by long chalks for a small ad. Got the provinces now. Cook
and general, exc. cuisine, housemaid kept. Wanted live man for spirit
counter. Resp. girl (R.C.) wishes to hear of post in fruit or pork shop.
James Carlisle made that. Six and a half per cent dividend. Made a big
deal on Coates's shares. Ca' canny. Cunning old Scotch hunks. All the
toady news. Our gracious and popular vicereine. Bought the _Irish Field_
now. Lady Mountcashel has quite recovered after her confinement and
rode out with the Ward Union staghounds at the enlargement yesterday
at Rathoath. Uneatable fox. Pothunters too. Fear injects juices make
it tender enough for them. Riding astride. Sit her horse like a man.
Weightcarrying huntress. No sidesaddle or pillion for her, not for Joe.
First to the meet and in at the death. Strong as a brood mare some of
those horsey women. Swagger around livery stables. Toss off a glass
of brandy neat while you'd say knife. That one at the Grosvenor this
morning. Up with her on the car: wishswish. Stonewall or fivebarred gate
put her mount to it. Think that pugnosed driver did it out of spite. Who
is this she was like? O yes! Mrs Miriam Dandrade that sold me her old
wraps and black underclothes in the Shelbourne hotel. Divorced Spanish
American. Didn't take a feather out of her my handling them. As if I was
her clotheshorse. Saw her in the viceregal party when Stubbs the park
ranger got me in with Whelan of the _Express._ Scavenging what the
quality left. High tea. Mayonnaise I poured on the plums thinking it was
custard. Her ears ought to have tingled for a few weeks after. Want to
be a bull for her. Born courtesan. No nursery work for her, thanks.

Poor Mrs Purefoy! Methodist husband. Method in his madness. Saffron bun
and milk and soda lunch in the educational dairy. Y. M. C. A. Eating
with a stopwatch, thirtytwo chews to the minute. And still his
muttonchop whiskers grew. Supposed to be well connected. Theodore's
cousin in Dublin Castle. One tony relative in every family. Hardy
annuals he presents her with. Saw him out at the Three Jolly Topers
marching along bareheaded and his eldest boy carrying one in a
marketnet. The squallers. Poor thing! Then having to give the breast
year after year all hours of the night. Selfish those t.t's are. Dog in
the manger. Only one lump of sugar in my tea, if you please.

He stood at Fleet street crossing. Luncheon interval. A sixpenny at
Rowe's? Must look up that ad in the national library. An eightpenny in
the Burton. Better. On my way.

He walked on past Bolton's Westmoreland house. Tea. Tea. Tea. I forgot
to tap Tom Kernan.

Sss. Dth, dth, dth! Three days imagine groaning on a bed with a
vinegared handkerchief round her forehead, her belly swollen out. Phew!
Dreadful simply! Child's head too big: forceps. Doubled up inside her
trying to butt its way out blindly, groping for the way out. Kill me
that would. Lucky Molly got over hers lightly. They ought to invent
something to stop that. Life with hard labour. Twilight sleep idea:
queen Victoria was given that. Nine she had. A good layer. Old
woman that lived in a shoe she had so many children. Suppose he was
consumptive. Time someone thought about it instead of gassing about the
what was it the pensive bosom of the silver effulgence. Flapdoodle to
feed fools on. They could easily have big establishments whole thing
quite painless out of all the taxes give every child born five quid at
compound interest up to twentyone five per cent is a hundred shillings
and five tiresome pounds multiply by twenty decimal system encourage
people to put by money save hundred and ten and a bit twentyone years
want to work it out on paper come to a tidy sum more than you think.

Not stillborn of course. They are not even registered. Trouble for
nothing.

Funny sight two of them together, their bellies out. Molly and Mrs
Moisel. Mothers' meeting. Phthisis retires for the time being, then
returns. How flat they look all of a sudden after. Peaceful eyes. Weight
off their mind. Old Mrs Thornton was a jolly old soul. All my babies,
she said. The spoon of pap in her mouth before she fed them. O, that's
nyumnyum. Got her hand crushed by old Tom Wall's son. His first bow to
the public. Head like a prize pumpkin. Snuffy Dr Murren. People knocking
them up at all hours. For God' sake, doctor. Wife in her throes. Then
keep them waiting months for their fee. To attendance on your wife. No
gratitude in people. Humane doctors, most of them.

Before the huge high door of the Irish house of parliament a flock of
pigeons flew. Their little frolic after meals. Who will we do it on? I
pick the fellow in black. Here goes. Here's good luck. Must be thrilling
from the air. Apjohn, myself and Owen Goldberg up in the trees near
Goose green playing the monkeys. Mackerel they called me.

A squad of constables debouched from College street, marching in Indian
file. Goosestep. Foodheated faces, sweating helmets, patting their
truncheons. After their feed with a good load of fat soup under their
belts. Policeman's lot is oft a happy one. They split up in groups and
scattered, saluting, towards their beats. Let out to graze. Best moment
to attack one in pudding time. A punch in his dinner. A squad of others,
marching irregularly, rounded Trinity railings making for the station.
Bound for their troughs. Prepare to receive cavalry. Prepare to receive
soup.

He crossed under Tommy Moore's roguish finger. They did right to put him
up over a urinal: meeting of the waters. Ought to be places for women.
Running into cakeshops. Settle my hat straight. _There is not in this
wide world a vallee_. Great song of Julia Morkan's. Kept her voice up to
the very last. Pupil of Michael Balfe's, wasn't she?

He gazed after the last broad tunic. Nasty customers to tackle. Jack
Power could a tale unfold: father a G man. If a fellow gave them trouble
being lagged they let him have it hot and heavy in the bridewell.
Can't blame them after all with the job they have especially the young
hornies. That horsepoliceman the day Joe Chamberlain was given his
degree in Trinity he got a run for his money. My word he did! His
horse's hoofs clattering after us down Abbey street. Lucky I had the
presence of mind to dive into Manning's or I was souped. He did come a
wallop, by George. Must have cracked his skull on the cobblestones. I
oughtn't to have got myself swept along with those medicals. And the
Trinity jibs in their mortarboards. Looking for trouble. Still I got to
know that young Dixon who dressed that sting for me in the Mater and now
he's in Holles street where Mrs Purefoy. Wheels within wheels. Police
whistle in my ears still. All skedaddled. Why he fixed on me. Give me in
charge. Right here it began.

--Up the Boers!

--Three cheers for De Wet!

--We'll hang Joe Chamberlain on a sourapple tree.

Silly billies: mob of young cubs yelling their guts out. Vinegar hill.
The Butter exchange band. Few years' time half of them magistrates and
civil servants. War comes on: into the army helterskelter: same fellows
used to. Whether on the scaffold high.

Never know who you're talking to. Corny Kelleher he has Harvey Duff in
his eye. Like that Peter or Denis or James Carey that blew the gaff on
the invincibles. Member of the corporation too. Egging raw youths on to
get in the know all the time drawing secret service pay from the castle.
Drop him like a hot potato. Why those plainclothes men are always
courting slaveys. Easily twig a man used to uniform. Squarepushing up
against a backdoor. Maul her a bit. Then the next thing on the menu. And
who is the gentleman does be visiting there? Was the young master saying
anything? Peeping Tom through the keyhole. Decoy duck. Hotblooded young
student fooling round her fat arms ironing.

--Are those yours, Mary?

--I don't wear such things... Stop or I'll tell the missus on you. Out
half the night.

--There are great times coming, Mary. Wait till you see.

--Ah, gelong with your great times coming.

Barmaids too. Tobaccoshopgirls.

James Stephens' idea was the best. He knew them. Circles of ten so that
a fellow couldn't round on more than his own ring. Sinn Fein. Back out
you get the knife. Hidden hand. Stay in. The firing squad. Turnkey's
daughter got him out of Richmond, off from Lusk. Putting up in the
Buckingham Palace hotel under their very noses. Garibaldi.

You must have a certain fascination: Parnell. Arthur Griffith is a
squareheaded fellow but he has no go in him for the mob. Or gas about
our lovely land. Gammon and spinach. Dublin Bakery Company's tearoom.
Debating societies. That republicanism is the best form of government.
That the language question should take precedence of the economic
question. Have your daughters inveigling them to your house. Stuff them
up with meat and drink. Michaelmas goose. Here's a good lump of thyme
seasoning under the apron for you. Have another quart of goosegrease
before it gets too cold. Halffed enthusiasts. Penny roll and a walk with
the band. No grace for the carver. The thought that the other chap pays
best sauce in the world. Make themselves thoroughly at home. Show us
over those apricots, meaning peaches. The not far distant day. Homerule
sun rising up in the northwest.

His smile faded as he walked, a heavy cloud hiding the sun slowly,
shadowing Trinity's surly front. Trams passed one another, ingoing,
outgoing, clanging. Useless words. Things go on same, day after day:
squads of police marching out, back: trams in, out. Those two loonies
mooching about. Dignam carted off. Mina Purefoy swollen belly on a
bed groaning to have a child tugged out of her. One born every second
somewhere. Other dying every second. Since I fed the birds five minutes.
Three hundred kicked the bucket. Other three hundred born, washing the
blood off, all are washed in the blood of the lamb, bawling maaaaaa.

Cityful passing away, other cityful coming, passing away too: other
coming on, passing on. Houses, lines of houses, streets, miles of
pavements, piledup bricks, stones. Changing hands. This owner, that.
Landlord never dies they say. Other steps into his shoes when he gets
his notice to quit. They buy the place up with gold and still they have
all the gold. Swindle in it somewhere. Piled up in cities, worn away age
after age. Pyramids in sand. Built on bread and onions. Slaves Chinese
wall. Babylon. Big stones left. Round towers. Rest rubble, sprawling
suburbs, jerrybuilt. Kerwan's mushroom houses built of breeze. Shelter,
for the night.

No-one is anything.

This is the very worst hour of the day. Vitality. Dull, gloomy: hate
this hour. Feel as if I had been eaten and spewed.

Provost's house. The reverend Dr Salmon: tinned salmon. Well tinned in
there. Like a mortuary chapel. Wouldn't live in it if they paid me. Hope
they have liver and bacon today. Nature abhors a vacuum.

The sun freed itself slowly and lit glints of light among the silverware
opposite in Walter Sexton's window by which John Howard Parnell passed,
unseeing.

There he is: the brother. Image of him. Haunting face. Now that's a
coincidence. Course hundreds of times you think of a person and don't
meet him. Like a man walking in his sleep. No-one knows him. Must be a
corporation meeting today. They say he never put on the city marshal's
uniform since he got the job. Charley Kavanagh used to come out on
his high horse, cocked hat, puffed, powdered and shaved. Look at the
woebegone walk of him. Eaten a bad egg. Poached eyes on ghost. I have a
pain. Great man's brother: his brother's brother. He'd look nice on the
city charger. Drop into the D.B.C. probably for his coffee, play chess
there. His brother used men as pawns. Let them all go to pot. Afraid to
pass a remark on him. Freeze them up with that eye of his. That's the
fascination: the name. All a bit touched. Mad Fanny and his other sister
Mrs Dickinson driving about with scarlet harness. Bolt upright lik
surgeon M'Ardle. Still David Sheehy beat him for south Meath. Apply
for the Chiltern Hundreds and retire into public life. The patriot's
banquet. Eating orangepeels in the park. Simon Dedalus said when they
put him in parliament that Parnell would come back from the grave and
lead him out of the house of commons by the arm.

--Of the twoheaded octopus, one of whose heads is the head upon which
the ends of the world have forgotten to come while the other speaks with
a Scotch accent. The tentacles...

They passed from behind Mr Bloom along the curbstone. Beard and bicycle.
Young woman.

And there he is too. Now that's really a coincidence: second time.
Coming events cast their shadows before. With the approval of the
eminent poet, Mr Geo. Russell. That might be Lizzie Twigg with him. A.
E.: what does that mean? Initials perhaps. Albert Edward, Arthur Edmund,
Alphonsus Eb Ed El Esquire. What was he saying? The ends of the world
with a Scotch accent. Tentacles: octopus. Something occult: symbolism.
Holding forth. She's taking it all in. Not saying a word. To aid
gentleman in literary work.

His eyes followed the high figure in homespun, beard and bicycle,
a listening woman at his side. Coming from the vegetarian. Only
weggebobbles and fruit. Don't eat a beefsteak. If you do the eyes of
that cow will pursue you through all eternity. They say it's healthier.
Windandwatery though. Tried it. Keep you on the run all day. Bad as
a bloater. Dreams all night. Why do they call that thing they gave me
nutsteak? Nutarians. Fruitarians. To give you the idea you are eating
rumpsteak. Absurd. Salty too. They cook in soda. Keep you sitting by the
tap all night.

Her stockings are loose over her ankles. I detest that: so tasteless.
Those literary etherial people they are all. Dreamy, cloudy,
symbolistic. Esthetes they are. I wouldn't be surprised if it was that
kind of food you see produces the like waves of the brain the poetical.
For example one of those policemen sweating Irish stew into their shirts
you couldn't squeeze a line of poetry out of him. Don't know what poetry
is even. Must be in a certain mood.

     _The dreamy cloudy gull
     Waves o'er the waters dull._

He crossed at Nassau street corner and stood before the window of Yeates
and Son, pricing the fieldglasses. Or will I drop into old Harris's and
have a chat with young Sinclair? Wellmannered fellow. Probably at his
lunch. Must get those old glasses of mine set right. Goerz lenses six
guineas. Germans making their way everywhere. Sell on easy terms to
capture trade. Undercutting. Might chance on a pair in the railway lost
property office. Astonishing the things people leave behind them in
trains and cloakrooms. What do they be thinking about? Women too.
Incredible. Last year travelling to Ennis had to pick up that farmer's
daughter's ba and hand it to her at Limerick junction. Unclaimed money
too. There's a little watch up there on the roof of the bank to test
those glasses by.


His lids came down on the lower rims of his irides. Can't see it. If you
imagine it's there you can almost see it. Can't see it.

He faced about and, standing between the awnings, held out his right
hand at arm's length towards the sun. Wanted to try that often. Yes:
completely. The tip of his little finger blotted out the sun's disk.
Must be the focus where the rays cross. If I had black glasses.
Interesting. There was a lot of talk about those sunspots when we
were in Lombard street west. Looking up from the back garden. Terrific
explosions they are. There will be a total eclipse this year: autumn
some time.

Now that I come to think of it that ball falls at Greenwich time. It's
the clock is worked by an electric wire from Dunsink. Must go out there
some first Saturday of the month. If I could get an introduction to
professor Joly or learn up something about his family. That would do to:
man always feels complimented. Flattery where least expected. Nobleman
proud to be descended from some king's mistress. His foremother. Lay it
on with a trowel. Cap in hand goes through the land. Not go in and blurt
out what you know you're not to: what's parallax? Show this gentleman
the door.

Ah.

His hand fell to his side again.

Never know anything about it. Waste of time. Gasballs spinning about,
crossing each other, passing. Same old dingdong always. Gas: then solid:
then world: then cold: then dead shell drifting around, frozen rock,
like that pineapple rock. The moon. Must be a new moon out, she said. I
believe there is.

He went on by la maison Claire.

Wait. The full moon was the night we were Sunday fortnight exactly there
is a new moon. Walking down by the Tolka. Not bad for a Fairview moon.
She was humming. The young May moon she's beaming, love. He other side
of her. Elbow, arm. He. Glowworm's la-amp is gleaming, love. Touch.
Fingers. Asking. Answer. Yes.

Stop. Stop. If it was it was. Must.

Mr Bloom, quickbreathing, slowlier walking passed Adam court.

With a keep quiet relief his eyes took note this is the street here
middle of the day of Bob Doran's bottle shoulders. On his annual bend,
M Coy said. They drink in order to say or do something or _cherchez la
femme_. Up in the Coombe with chummies and streetwalkers and then the
rest of the year sober as a judge.

Yes. Thought so. Sloping into the Empire. Gone. Plain soda would do him
good. Where Pat Kinsella had his Harp theatre before Whitbred ran the
Queen's. Broth of a boy. Dion Boucicault business with his harvestmoon
face in a poky bonnet. Three Purty Maids from School. How time flies,
eh? Showing long red pantaloons under his skirts. Drinkers, drinking,
laughed spluttering, their drink against their breath. More power, Pat.
Coarse red: fun for drunkards: guffaw and smoke. Take off that white
hat. His parboiled eyes. Where is he now? Beggar somewhere. The harp
that once did starve us all.

I was happier then. Or was that I? Or am I now I? Twentyeight I was. She
twentythree. When we left Lombard street west something changed. Could
never like it again after Rudy. Can't bring back time. Like holding
water in your hand. Would you go back to then? Just beginning then.
Would you? Are you not happy in your home you poor little naughty boy?
Wants to sew on buttons for me. I must answer. Write it in the library.

Grafton street gay with housed awnings lured his senses. Muslin prints,
silkdames and dowagers, jingle of harnesses, hoofthuds lowringing in the
baking causeway. Thick feet that woman has in the white stockings. Hope
the rain mucks them up on her. Countrybred chawbacon. All the beef to
the heels were in. Always gives a woman clumsy feet. Molly looks out of
plumb.

He passed, dallying, the windows of Brown Thomas, silk mercers. Cascades
of ribbons. Flimsy China silks. A tilted urn poured from its mouth a
flood of bloodhued poplin: lustrous blood. The huguenots brought that
here. _La causa Ã¨ santa_! Tara tara. Great chorus that. Taree tara. Must
be washed in rainwater. Meyerbeer. Tara: bom bom bom.

Pincushions. I'm a long time threatening to buy one. Sticking them all
over the place. Needles in window curtains.

He bared slightly his left forearm. Scrape: nearly gone. Not today
anyhow. Must go back for that lotion. For her birthday perhaps.
Junejulyaugseptember eighth. Nearly three months off. Then she mightn't
like it. Women won't pick up pins. Say it cuts lo.

Gleaming silks, petticoats on slim brass rails, rays of flat silk
stockings.

Useless to go back. Had to be. Tell me all.

High voices. Sunwarm silk. Jingling harnesses. All for a woman, home and
houses, silkwebs, silver, rich fruits spicy from Jaffa. Agendath Netaim.
Wealth of the world.

A warm human plumpness settled down on his brain. His brain yielded.
Perfume of embraces all him assailed. With hungered flesh obscurely, he
mutely craved to adore.

Duke street. Here we are. Must eat. The Burton. Feel better then.

He turned Combridge's corner, still pursued. Jingling, hoofthuds.
Perfumed bodies, warm, full. All kissed, yielded: in deep summer fields,
tangled pressed grass, in trickling hallways of tenements, along sofas,
creaking beds.

--Jack, love!

--Darling!

--Kiss me, Reggy!

--My boy!

--Love!

His heart astir he pushed in the door of the Burton restaurant. Stink
gripped his trembling breath: pungent meatjuice, slush of greens. See
the animals feed.

Men, men, men.

Perched on high stools by the bar, hats shoved back, at the tables
calling for more bread no charge, swilling, wolfing gobfuls of sloppy
food, their eyes bulging, wiping wetted moustaches. A pallid suetfaced
young man polished his tumbler knife fork and spoon with his napkin. New
set of microbes. A man with an infant's saucestained napkin tucked round
him shovelled gurgling soup down his gullet. A man spitting back on his
plate: halfmasticated gristle: gums: no teeth to chewchewchew it. Chump
chop from the grill. Bolting to get it over. Sad booser's eyes. Bitten
off more than he can chew. Am I like that? See ourselves as others see
us. Hungry man is an angry man. Working tooth and jaw. Don't! O! A bone!
That last pagan king of Ireland Cormac in the schoolpoem choked himself
at Sletty southward of the Boyne. Wonder what he was eating. Something
galoptious. Saint Patrick converted him to Christianity. Couldn't
swallow it all however.

--Roast beef and cabbage.

--One stew.

Smells of men. His gorge rose. Spaton sawdust, sweetish warmish
cigarette smoke, reek of plug, spilt beer, men's beery piss, the stale
of ferment.

Couldn't eat a morsel here. Fellow sharpening knife and fork to eat all
before him, old chap picking his tootles. Slight spasm, full, chewing
the cud. Before and after. Grace after meals. Look on this picture then
on that. Scoffing up stewgravy with sopping sippets of bread. Lick it
off the plate, man! Get out of this.

He gazed round the stooled and tabled eaters, tightening the wings of
his nose.

--Two stouts here.

--One corned and cabbage.

That fellow ramming a knifeful of cabbage down as if his life depended
on it. Good stroke. Give me the fidgets to look. Safer to eat from his
three hands. Tear it limb from limb. Second nature to him. Born with a
silver knife in his mouth. That's witty, I think. Or no. Silver means
born rich. Born with a knife. But then the allusion is lost.

An illgirt server gathered sticky clattering plates. Rock, the head
bailiff, standing at the bar blew the foamy crown from his tankard. Well
up: it splashed yellow near his boot. A diner, knife and fork upright,
elbows on table, ready for a second helping stared towards the foodlift
across his stained square of newspaper. Other chap telling him something
with his mouth full. Sympathetic listener. Table talk. I munched hum un
thu Unchster Bunk un Munchday. Ha? Did you, faith?

Mr Bloom raised two fingers doubtfully to his lips. His eyes said:

--Not here. Don't see him.

Out. I hate dirty eaters.

He backed towards the door. Get a light snack in Davy Byrne's. Stopgap.
Keep me going. Had a good breakfast.

--Roast and mashed here.

--Pint of stout.

Every fellow for his own, tooth and nail. Gulp. Grub. Gulp. Gobstuff.

He came out into clearer air and turned back towards Grafton street. Eat
or be eaten. Kill! Kill!

Suppose that communal kitchen years to come perhaps. All trotting down
with porringers and tommycans to be filled. Devour contents in the
street. John Howard Parnell example the provost of Trinity every
mother's son don't talk of your provosts and provost of Trinity women
and children cabmen priests parsons fieldmarshals archbishops. From
Ailesbury road, Clyde road, artisans' dwellings, north Dublin union,
lord mayor in his gingerbread coach, old queen in a bathchair. My
plate's empty. After you with our incorporated drinkingcup. Like sir
Philip Crampton's fountain. Rub off the microbes with your handkerchief.
Next chap rubs on a new batch with his. Father O'Flynn would make
hares of them all. Have rows all the same. All for number one. Children
fighting for the scrapings of the pot. Want a souppot as big as the
Phoenix park. Harpooning flitches and hindquarters out of it. Hate
people all round you. City Arms hotel _table d'hÃ´te_ she called it.
Soup, joint and sweet. Never know whose thoughts you're chewing. Then
who'd wash up all the plates and forks? Might be all feeding on tabloids
that time. Teeth getting worse and worse.

After all there's a lot in that vegetarian fine flavour of things from
the earth garlic of course it stinks after Italian organgrinders crisp
of onions mushrooms truffles. Pain to the animal too. Pluck and draw
fowl. Wretched brutes there at the cattlemarket waiting for the poleaxe
to split their skulls open. Moo. Poor trembling calves. Meh. Staggering
bob. Bubble and squeak. Butchers' buckets wobbly lights. Give us that
brisket off the hook. Plup. Rawhead and bloody bones. Flayed glasseyed
sheep hung from their haunches, sheepsnouts bloodypapered snivelling
nosejam on sawdust. Top and lashers going out. Don't maul them pieces,
young one.

Hot fresh blood they prescribe for decline. Blood always needed.
Insidious. Lick it up smokinghot, thick sugary. Famished ghosts.

Ah, I'm hungry.

He entered Davy Byrne's. Moral pub. He doesn't chat. Stands a drink now
and then. But in leapyear once in four. Cashed a cheque for me once.

What will I take now? He drew his watch. Let me see now. Shandygaff?

--Hello, Bloom, Nosey Flynn said from his nook.

--Hello, Flynn.

--How's things?

--Tiptop... Let me see. I'll take a glass of burgundy and... let me
see.

Sardines on the shelves. Almost taste them by looking. Sandwich? Ham
and his descendants musterred and bred there. Potted meats. What is home
without Plumtree's potted meat? Incomplete. What a stupid ad! Under the
obituary notices they stuck it. All up a plumtree. Dignam's potted meat.
Cannibals would with lemon and rice. White missionary too salty. Like
pickled pork. Expect the chief consumes the parts of honour. Ought to be
tough from exercise. His wives in a row to watch the effect. _There was
a right royal old nigger. Who ate or something the somethings of the
reverend Mr MacTrigger_. With it an abode of bliss. Lord knows what
concoction. Cauls mouldy tripes windpipes faked and minced up. Puzzle
find the meat. Kosher. No meat and milk together. Hygiene that was what
they call now. Yom Kippur fast spring cleaning of inside. Peace and
war depend on some fellow's digestion. Religions. Christmas turkeys and
geese. Slaughter of innocents. Eat drink and be merry. Then casual wards
full after. Heads bandaged. Cheese digests all but itself. Mity cheese.

--Have you a cheese sandwich?

--Yes, sir.

Like a few olives too if they had them. Italian I prefer. Good glass of
burgundy take away that. Lubricate. A nice salad, cool as a cucumber,
Tom Kernan can dress. Puts gusto into it. Pure olive oil. Milly served
me that cutlet with a sprig of parsley. Take one Spanish onion. God made
food, the devil the cooks. Devilled crab.

--Wife well?

--Quite well, thanks... A cheese sandwich, then. Gorgonzola, have you?

--Yes, sir.

Nosey Flynn sipped his grog.

--Doing any singing those times?

Look at his mouth. Could whistle in his own ear. Flap ears to match.
Music. Knows as much about it as my coachman. Still better tell him.
Does no harm. Free ad.

--She's engaged for a big tour end of this month. You may have heard
perhaps.

--No. O, that's the style. Who's getting it up?

The curate served.

--How much is that?

--Seven d., sir... Thank you, sir.

Mr Bloom cut his sandwich into slender strips. _Mr MacTrigger_. Easier
than the dreamy creamy stuff. _His five hundred wives. Had the time of
their lives._

--Mustard, sir?

--Thank you.

He studded under each lifted strip yellow blobs. _Their lives_. I have
it. _It grew bigger and bigger and bigger_.

--Getting it up? he said. Well, it's like a company idea, you see. Part
shares and part profits.

--Ay, now I remember, Nosey Flynn said, putting his hand in his pocket
to scratch his groin. Who is this was telling me? Isn't Blazes Boylan
mixed up in it?

A warm shock of air heat of mustard hanched on Mr Bloom's heart. He
raised his eyes and met the stare of a bilious clock. Two. Pub clock
five minutes fast. Time going on. Hands moving. Two. Not yet.

His midriff yearned then upward, sank within him, yearned more longly,
longingly.

Wine.

He smellsipped the cordial juice and, bidding his throat strongly to
speed it, set his wineglass delicately down.

--Yes, he said. He's the organiser in point of fact.

No fear: no brains.

Nosey Flynn snuffled and scratched. Flea having a good square meal.

--He had a good slice of luck, Jack Mooney was telling me, over that
boxingmatch Myler Keogh won again that soldier in the Portobello
barracks. By God, he had the little kipper down in the county Carlow he
was telling me...

Hope that dewdrop doesn't come down into his glass. No, snuffled it up.

--For near a month, man, before it came off. Sucking duck eggs by God
till further orders. Keep him off the boose, see? O, by God, Blazes is a
hairy chap.

Davy Byrne came forward from the hindbar in tuckstitched shirtsleeves,
cleaning his lips with two wipes of his napkin. Herring's blush. Whose
smile upon each feature plays with such and such replete. Too much fat
on the parsnips.

--And here's himself and pepper on him, Nosey Flynn said. Can you give
us a good one for the Gold cup?

--I'm off that, Mr Flynn, Davy Byrne answered. I never put anything on a
horse.

--You're right there, Nosey Flynn said.

Mr Bloom ate his strips of sandwich, fresh clean bread, with relish of
disgust pungent mustard, the feety savour of green cheese. Sips of his
wine soothed his palate. Not logwood that. Tastes fuller this weather
with the chill off.

Nice quiet bar. Nice piece of wood in that counter. Nicely planed. Like
the way it curves there.

--I wouldn't do anything at all in that line, Davy Byrne said. It ruined
many a man, the same horses.

Vintners' sweepstake. Licensed for the sale of beer, wine and spirits
for consumption on the premises. Heads I win tails you lose.

--True for you, Nosey Flynn said. Unless you're in the know. There's
no straight sport going now. Lenehan gets some good ones. He's giving
Sceptre today. Zinfandel's the favourite, lord Howard de Walden's, won
at Epsom. Morny Cannon is riding him. I could have got seven to one
against Saint Amant a fortnight before.

--That so? Davy Byrne said...

He went towards the window and, taking up the pettycash book, scanned
its pages.

--I could, faith, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling. That was a rare bit of
horseflesh. Saint Frusquin was her sire. She won in a thunderstorm,
Rothschild's filly, with wadding in her ears. Blue jacket and yellow
cap. Bad luck to big Ben Dollard and his John O'Gaunt. He put me off it.
Ay.

He drank resignedly from his tumbler, running his fingers down the
flutes.

--Ay, he said, sighing.

Mr Bloom, champing, standing, looked upon his sigh. Nosey numbskull.
Will I tell him that horse Lenehan? He knows already. Better let him
forget. Go and lose more. Fool and his money. Dewdrop coming down again.
Cold nose he'd have kissing a woman. Still they might like. Prickly
beards they like. Dogs' cold noses. Old Mrs Riordan with the rumbling
stomach's Skye terrier in the City Arms hotel. Molly fondling him in her
lap. O, the big doggybowwowsywowsy!

Wine soaked and softened rolled pith of bread mustard a moment mawkish
cheese. Nice wine it is. Taste it better because I'm not thirsty. Bath
of course does that. Just a bite or two. Then about six o'clock I can.
Six. Six. Time will be gone then. She...

Mild fire of wine kindled his veins. I wanted that badly. Felt so
off colour. His eyes unhungrily saw shelves of tins: sardines, gaudy
lobsters' claws. All the odd things people pick up for food. Out of
shells, periwinkles with a pin, off trees, snails out of the ground the
French eat, out of the sea with bait on a hook. Silly fish learn nothing
in a thousand years. If you didn't know risky putting anything into your
mouth. Poisonous berries. Johnny Magories. Roundness you think good.
Gaudy colour warns you off. One fellow told another and so on. Try it
on the dog first. Led on by the smell or the look. Tempting fruit.
Ice cones. Cream. Instinct. Orangegroves for instance. Need artificial
irrigation. Bleibtreustrasse. Yes but what about oysters. Unsightly like
a clot of phlegm. Filthy shells. Devil to open them too. Who found them
out? Garbage, sewage they feed on. Fizz and Red bank oysters. Effect
on the sexual. Aphrodis. He was in the Red Bank this morning. Was he
oysters old fish at table perhaps he young flesh in bed no June has
no ar no oysters. But there are people like things high. Tainted game.
Jugged hare. First catch your hare. Chinese eating eggs fifty years old,
blue and green again. Dinner of thirty courses. Each dish harmless might
mix inside. Idea for a poison mystery. That archduke Leopold was it no
yes or was it Otto one of those Habsburgs? Or who was it used to eat the
scruff off his own head? Cheapest lunch in town. Of course aristocrats,
then the others copy to be in the fashion. Milly too rock oil and flour.
Raw pastry I like myself. Half the catch of oysters they throw back in
the sea to keep up the price. Cheap no-one would buy. Caviare. Do the
grand. Hock in green glasses. Swell blowout. Lady this. Powdered bosom
pearls. The _Ã©lite. CrÃ¨me de la crÃ¨me_. They want special dishes to
pretend they're. Hermit with a platter of pulse keep down the stings
of the flesh. Know me come eat with me. Royal sturgeon high sheriff,
Coffey, the butcher, right to venisons of the forest from his ex. Send
him back the half of a cow. Spread I saw down in the Master of the
Rolls' kitchen area. Whitehatted _chef_ like a rabbi. Combustible duck.
Curly cabbage _Ã  la duchesse de Parme_. Just as well to write it on the
bill of fare so you can know what you've eaten. Too many drugs spoil the
broth. I know it myself. Dosing it with Edwards' desiccated soup. Geese
stuffed silly for them. Lobsters boiled alive. Do ptake some ptarmigan.
Wouldn't mind being a waiter in a swell hotel. Tips, evening dress,
halfnaked ladies. May I tempt you to a little more filleted lemon sole,
miss Dubedat? Yes, do bedad. And she did bedad. Huguenot name I expect
that. A miss Dubedat lived in Killiney, I remember. _Du, de la_ French.
Still it's the same fish perhaps old Micky Hanlon of Moore street ripped
the guts out of making money hand over fist finger in fishes' gills
can't write his name on a cheque think he was painting the landscape
with his mouth twisted. Moooikill A Aitcha Ha ignorant as a kish of
brogues, worth fifty thousand pounds.

Stuck on the pane two flies buzzed, stuck.

Glowing wine on his palate lingered swallowed. Crushing in the winepress
grapes of Burgundy. Sun's heat it is. Seems to a secret touch telling me
memory. Touched his sense moistened remembered. Hidden under wild ferns
on Howth below us bay sleeping: sky. No sound. The sky. The bay purple
by the Lion's head. Green by Drumleck. Yellowgreen towards Sutton.
Fields of undersea, the lines faint brown in grass, buried cities.
Pillowed on my coat she had her hair, earwigs in the heather scrub
my hand under her nape, you'll toss me all. O wonder! Coolsoft with
ointments her hand touched me, caressed: her eyes upon me did not turn
away. Ravished over her I lay, full lips full open, kissed her mouth.
Yum. Softly she gave me in my mouth the seedcake warm and chewed.
Mawkish pulp her mouth had mumbled sweetsour of her spittle. Joy: I ate
it: joy. Young life, her lips that gave me pouting. Soft warm sticky
gumjelly lips. Flowers her eyes were, take me, willing eyes. Pebbles
fell. She lay still. A goat. No-one. High on Ben Howth rhododendrons a
nannygoat walking surefooted, dropping currants. Screened under ferns
she laughed warmfolded. Wildly I lay on her, kissed her: eyes, her lips,
her stretched neck beating, woman's breasts full in her blouse of nun's
veiling, fat nipples upright. Hot I tongued her. She kissed me. I was
kissed. All yielding she tossed my hair. Kissed, she kissed me.

Me. And me now.

Stuck, the flies buzzed.

His downcast eyes followed the silent veining of the oaken slab. Beauty:
it curves: curves are beauty. Shapely goddesses, Venus, Juno: curves the
world admires. Can see them library museum standing in the round hall,
naked goddesses. Aids to digestion. They don't care what man looks. All
to see. Never speaking. I mean to say to fellows like Flynn. Suppose she
did Pygmalion and Galatea what would she say first? Mortal! Put you in
your proper place. Quaffing nectar at mess with gods golden dishes, all
ambrosial. Not like a tanner lunch we have, boiled mutton, carrots and
turnips, bottle of Allsop. Nectar imagine it drinking electricity: gods'
food. Lovely forms of women sculped Junonian. Immortal lovely. And we
stuffing food in one hole and out behind: food, chyle, blood, dung,
earth, food: have to feed it like stoking an engine. They have no. Never
looked. I'll look today. Keeper won't see. Bend down let something drop
see if she.

Dribbling a quiet message from his bladder came to go to do not to
do there to do. A man and ready he drained his glass to the lees and
walked, to men too they gave themselves, manly conscious, lay with men
lovers, a youth enjoyed her, to the yard.

When the sound of his boots had ceased Davy Byrne said from his book:

--What is this he is? Isn't he in the insurance line?

--He's out of that long ago, Nosey Flynn said. He does canvassing for
the _Freeman._

--I know him well to see, Davy Byrne said. Is he in trouble?

--Trouble? Nosey Flynn said. Not that I heard of. Why?

--I noticed he was in mourning.

--Was he? Nosey Flynn said. So he was, faith. I asked him how was all at
home. You're right, by God. So he was.

--I never broach the subject, Davy Byrne said humanely, if I see a
gentleman is in trouble that way. It only brings it up fresh in their
minds.

--It's not the wife anyhow, Nosey Flynn said. I met him the day before
yesterday and he coming out of that Irish farm dairy John Wyse Nolan's
wife has in Henry street with a jar of cream in his hand taking it home
to his better half. She's well nourished, I tell you. Plovers on toast.

--And is he doing for the _Freeman?_ Davy Byrne said.

Nosey Flynn pursed his lips.

---He doesn't buy cream on the ads he picks up. You can make bacon of
that.

--How so? Davy Byrne asked, coming from his book.

Nosey Flynn made swift passes in the air with juggling fingers. He
winked.

--He's in the craft, he said.

---Do you tell me so? Davy Byrne said.

--Very much so, Nosey Flynn said. Ancient free and accepted order. He's
an excellent brother. Light, life and love, by God. They give him a leg
up. I was told that by a--well, I won't say who.

--Is that a fact?

--O, it's a fine order, Nosey Flynn said. They stick to you when you're
down. I know a fellow was trying to get into it. But they're as close as
damn it. By God they did right to keep the women out of it.

Davy Byrne smiledyawnednodded all in one:

--Iiiiiichaaaaaaach!

--There was one woman, Nosey Flynn said, hid herself in a clock to find
out what they do be doing. But be damned but they smelt her out and
swore her in on the spot a master mason. That was one of the saint
Legers of Doneraile.

Davy Byrne, sated after his yawn, said with tearwashed eyes:

--And is that a fact? Decent quiet man he is. I often saw him in here
and I never once saw him--you know, over the line.

--God Almighty couldn't make him drunk, Nosey Flynn said firmly. Slips
off when the fun gets too hot. Didn't you see him look at his watch? Ah,
you weren't there. If you ask him to have a drink first thing he does
he outs with the watch to see what he ought to imbibe. Declare to God he
does.

--There are some like that, Davy Byrne said. He's a safe man, I'd say.

--He's not too bad, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling it up. He's been known
to put his hand down too to help a fellow. Give the devil his due. O,
Bloom has his good points. But there's one thing he'll never do.

His hand scrawled a dry pen signature beside his grog.

--I know, Davy Byrne said.

--Nothing in black and white, Nosey Flynn said.

Paddy Leonard and Bantam Lyons came in. Tom Rochford followed frowning,
a plaining hand on his claret waistcoat.

--Day, Mr Byrne.

--Day, gentlemen.

They paused at the counter.

--Who's standing? Paddy Leonard asked.

--I'm sitting anyhow, Nosey Flynn answered.

--Well, what'll it be? Paddy Leonard asked.

--I'll take a stone ginger, Bantam Lyons said.

--How much? Paddy Leonard cried. Since when, for God' sake? What's
yours, Tom?

--How is the main drainage? Nosey Flynn asked, sipping.

For answer Tom Rochford pressed his hand to his breastbone and
hiccupped.

--Would I trouble you for a glass of fresh water, Mr Byrne? he said.

--Certainly, sir.

Paddy Leonard eyed his alemates.

--Lord love a duck, he said. Look at what I'm standing drinks to! Cold
water and gingerpop! Two fellows that would suck whisky off a sore leg.
He has some bloody horse up his sleeve for the Gold cup. A dead snip.

--Zinfandel is it? Nosey Flynn asked.

Tom Rochford spilt powder from a twisted paper into the water set before
him.

--That cursed dyspepsia, he said before drinking.

--Breadsoda is very good, Davy Byrne said.

Tom Rochford nodded and drank.

--Is it Zinfandel?

--Say nothing! Bantam Lyons winked. I'm going to plunge five bob on my
own.

--Tell us if you're worth your salt and be damned to you, Paddy Leonard
said. Who gave it to you?

Mr Bloom on his way out raised three fingers in greeting.

--So long! Nosey Flynn said.

The others turned.

--That's the man now that gave it to me, Bantam Lyons whispered.

--Prrwht! Paddy Leonard said with scorn. Mr Byrne, sir, we'll take two
of your small Jamesons after that and a...

--Stone ginger, Davy Byrne added civilly.

--Ay, Paddy Leonard said. A suckingbottle for the baby.

Mr Bloom walked towards Dawson street, his tongue brushing his teeth
smooth. Something green it would have to be: spinach, say. Then with
those Rontgen rays searchlight you could.

At Duke lane a ravenous terrier choked up a sick knuckly cud on the
cobblestones and lapped it with new zest. Surfeit. Returned with thanks
having fully digested the contents. First sweet then savoury. Mr Bloom
coasted warily. Ruminants. His second course. Their upper jaw they move.
Wonder if Tom Rochford will do anything with that invention of his?
Wasting time explaining it to Flynn's mouth. Lean people long mouths.
Ought to be a hall or a place where inventors could go in and invent
free. Course then you'd have all the cranks pestering.

He hummed, prolonging in solemn echo the closes of the bars:

_Don Giovanni, a cenar teco M'invitasti._

Feel better. Burgundy. Good pick me up. Who distilled first? Some chap
in the blues. Dutch courage. That _Kilkenny People_ in the national
library now I must.

Bare clean closestools waiting in the window of William Miller, plumber,
turned back his thoughts. They could: and watch it all the way down,
swallow a pin sometimes come out of the ribs years after, tour round the
body changing biliary duct spleen squirting liver gastric juice coils of
intestines like pipes. But the poor buffer would have to stand all the
time with his insides entrails on show. Science.

--_A cenar teco._

What does that _teco_ mean? Tonight perhaps.

     _Don Giovanni, thou hast me invited
     To come to supper tonight,
     The rum the rumdum._

Doesn't go properly.

Keyes: two months if I get Nannetti to. That'll be two pounds ten about
two pounds eight. Three Hynes owes me. Two eleven. Prescott's dyeworks
van over there. If I get Billy Prescott's ad: two fifteen. Five guineas
about. On the pig's back.

Could buy one of those silk petticoats for Molly, colour of her new
garters.

Today. Today. Not think.

Tour the south then. What about English wateringplaces? Brighton,
Margate. Piers by moonlight. Her voice floating out. Those lovely
seaside girls. Against John Long's a drowsing loafer lounged in heavy
thought, gnawing a crusted knuckle. Handy man wants job. Small wages.
Will eat anything.

Mr Bloom turned at Gray's confectioner's window of unbought tarts and
passed the reverend Thomas Connellan's bookstore. _Why I left the church
of Rome? Birds' Nest._ Women run him. They say they used to give pauper
children soup to change to protestants in the time of the potato blight.
Society over the way papa went to for the conversion of poor jews. Same
bait. Why we left the church of Rome.

A blind stripling stood tapping the curbstone with his slender cane. No
tram in sight. Wants to cross.

--Do you want to cross? Mr Bloom asked.

The blind stripling did not answer. His wallface frowned weakly. He
moved his head uncertainly.

--You're in Dawson street, Mr Bloom said. Molesworth street is opposite.
Do you want to cross? There's nothing in the way.

The cane moved out trembling to the left. Mr Bloom's eye followed its
line and saw again the dyeworks' van drawn up before Drago's. Where I
saw his brillantined hair just when I was. Horse drooping. Driver in
John Long's. Slaking his drouth.

--There's a van there, Mr Bloom said, but it's not moving. I'll see you
across. Do you want to go to Molesworth street?

--Yes, the stripling answered. South Frederick street.

--Come, Mr Bloom said.

He touched the thin elbow gently: then took the limp seeing hand to
guide it forward.

Say something to him. Better not do the condescending. They mistrust
what you tell them. Pass a common remark.

--The rain kept off.

No answer.

Stains on his coat. Slobbers his food, I suppose. Tastes all different
for him. Have to be spoonfed first. Like a child's hand, his hand. Like
Milly's was. Sensitive. Sizing me up I daresay from my hand. Wonder
if he has a name. Van. Keep his cane clear of the horse's legs: tired
drudge get his doze. That's right. Clear. Behind a bull: in front of a
horse.

--Thanks, sir.

Knows I'm a man. Voice.

--Right now? First turn to the left.

The blind stripling tapped the curbstone and went on his way, drawing
his cane back, feeling again.

Mr Bloom walked behind the eyeless feet, a flatcut suit of herringbone
tweed. Poor young fellow! How on earth did he know that van was there?
Must have felt it. See things in their forehead perhaps: kind of sense
of volume. Weight or size of it, something blacker than the dark. Wonder
would he feel it if something was removed. Feel a gap. Queer idea of
Dublin he must have, tapping his way round by the stones. Could he walk
in a beeline if he hadn't that cane? Bloodless pious face like a fellow
going in to be a priest.

Penrose! That was that chap's name.

Look at all the things they can learn to do. Read with their fingers.
Tune pianos. Or we are surprised they have any brains. Why we think a
deformed person or a hunchback clever if he says something we might say.
Of course the other senses are more. Embroider. Plait baskets. People
ought to help. Workbasket I could buy for Molly's birthday. Hates
sewing. Might take an objection. Dark men they call them.

Sense of smell must be stronger too. Smells on all sides, bunched
together. Each street different smell. Each person too. Then the spring,
the summer: smells. Tastes? They say you can't taste wines with your
eyes shut or a cold in the head. Also smoke in the dark they say get no
pleasure.

And with a woman, for instance. More shameless not seeing. That girl
passing the Stewart institution, head in the air. Look at me. I have
them all on. Must be strange not to see her. Kind of a form in his
mind's eye. The voice, temperatures: when he touches her with his
fingers must almost see the lines, the curves. His hands on her hair,
for instance. Say it was black, for instance. Good. We call it black.
Then passing over her white skin. Different feel perhaps. Feeling of
white.

Postoffice. Must answer. Fag today. Send her a postal order two
shillings, half a crown. Accept my little present. Stationer's just here
too. Wait. Think over it.

With a gentle finger he felt ever so slowly the hair combed back above
his ears. Again. Fibres of fine fine straw. Then gently his finger felt
the skin of his right cheek. Downy hair there too. Not smooth enough.
The belly is the smoothest. No-one about. There he goes into Frederick
street. Perhaps to Levenston's dancing academy piano. Might be settling
my braces.

Walking by Doran's publichouse he slid his hand between his waistcoat
and trousers and, pulling aside his shirt gently, felt a slack fold of
his belly. But I know it's whitey yellow. Want to try in the dark to
see.

He withdrew his hand and pulled his dress to.

Poor fellow! Quite a boy. Terrible. Really terrible. What dreams would
he have, not seeing? Life a dream for him. Where is the justice being
born that way? All those women and children excursion beanfeast burned
and drowned in New York. Holocaust. Karma they call that transmigration
for sins you did in a past life the reincarnation met him pike hoses.
Dear, dear, dear. Pity, of course: but somehow you can't cotton on to
them someway.

Sir Frederick Falkiner going into the freemasons' hall. Solemn as Troy.
After his good lunch in Earlsfort terrace. Old legal cronies cracking
a magnum. Tales of the bench and assizes and annals of the bluecoat
school. I sentenced him to ten years. I suppose he'd turn up his nose
at that stuff I drank. Vintage wine for them, the year marked on a
dusty bottle. Has his own ideas of justice in the recorder's court.
Wellmeaning old man. Police chargesheets crammed with cases get their
percentage manufacturing crime. Sends them to the rightabout. The devil
on moneylenders. Gave Reuben J. a great strawcalling. Now he's really
what they call a dirty jew. Power those judges have. Crusty old topers
in wigs. Bear with a sore paw. And may the Lord have mercy on your soul.

Hello, placard. Mirus bazaar. His Excellency the lord lieutenant.
Sixteenth. Today it is. In aid of funds for Mercer's hospital. _The
Messiah_ was first given for that. Yes. Handel. What about going out
there: Ballsbridge. Drop in on Keyes. No use sticking to him like a
leech. Wear out my welcome. Sure to know someone on the gate.

Mr Bloom came to Kildare street. First I must. Library.

Straw hat in sunlight. Tan shoes. Turnedup trousers. It is. It is.

His heart quopped softly. To the right. Museum. Goddesses. He swerved to
the right.

Is it? Almost certain. Won't look. Wine in my face. Why did I? Too
heady. Yes, it is. The walk. Not see. Get on.

Making for the museum gate with long windy steps he lifted his eyes.
Handsome building. Sir Thomas Deane designed. Not following me?

Didn't see me perhaps. Light in his eyes.

The flutter of his breath came forth in short sighs. Quick. Cold
statues: quiet there. Safe in a minute.

No. Didn't see me. After two. Just at the gate.

My heart!

His eyes beating looked steadfastly at cream curves of stone. Sir Thomas
Deane was the Greek architecture.

Look for something I.

His hasty hand went quick into a pocket, took out, read unfolded
Agendath Netaim. Where did I?

Busy looking.

He thrust back quick Agendath.

Afternoon she said.

I am looking for that. Yes, that. Try all pockets. Handker. _Freeman._
Where did I? Ah, yes. Trousers. Potato. Purse. Where?

Hurry. Walk quietly. Moment more. My heart.

His hand looking for the where did I put found in his hip pocket soap
lotion have to call tepid paper stuck. Ah soap there I yes. Gate.

Safe!


Urbane, to comfort them, the quaker librarian purred:


--And we have, have we not, those priceless pages of _Wilhelm Meister_.
A great poet on a great brother poet. A hesitating soul taking arms
against a sea of troubles, torn by conflicting doubts, as one sees in
real life.

He came a step a sinkapace forward on neatsleather creaking and a step
backward a sinkapace on the solemn floor.

A noiseless attendant setting open the door but slightly made him a
noiseless beck.

--Directly, said he, creaking to go, albeit lingering. The beautiful
ineffectual dreamer who comes to grief against hard facts. One always
feels that Goethe's judgments are so true. True in the larger analysis.

Twicreakingly analysis he corantoed off. Bald, most zealous by the door
he gave his large ear all to the attendant's words: heard them: and was
gone.

Two left.

--Monsieur de la Palice, Stephen sneered, was alive fifteen minutes
before his death.

--Have you found those six brave medicals, John Eglinton asked with
elder's gall, to write _Paradise Lost_ at your dictation? _The Sorrows
of Satan_ he calls it.

Smile. Smile Cranly's smile.

     _First he tickled her
     Then he patted her
     Then he passed the female catheter.
     For he was a medical
     Jolly old medi..._

--I feel you would need one more for _Hamlet._ Seven is dear to the
mystic mind. The shining seven W.B. calls them.

Glittereyed his rufous skull close to his greencapped desklamp sought
the face bearded amid darkgreener shadow, an ollav, holyeyed. He laughed
low: a sizar's laugh of Trinity: unanswered.

     _Orchestral Satan, weeping many a rood
     Tears such as angels weep.
     Ed egli avea del cul fatto trombetta._

He holds my follies hostage.

Cranly's eleven true Wicklowmen to free their sireland. Gaptoothed
Kathleen, her four beautiful green fields, the stranger in her house.
And one more to hail him: _ave, rabbi_: the Tinahely twelve. In the
shadow of the glen he cooees for them. My soul's youth I gave him, night
by night. God speed. Good hunting.

Mulligan has my telegram.

Folly. Persist.

--Our young Irish bards, John Eglinton censured, have yet to create a
figure which the world will set beside Saxon Shakespeare's Hamlet though
I admire him, as old Ben did, on this side idolatry.

--All these questions are purely academic, Russell oracled out of his
shadow. I mean, whether Hamlet is Shakespeare or James I or Essex.
Clergymen's discussions of the historicity of Jesus. Art has to reveal
to us ideas, formless spiritual essences. The supreme question about a
work of art is out of how deep a life does it spring. The painting of
Gustave Moreau is the painting of ideas. The deepest poetry of Shelley,
the words of Hamlet bring our minds into contact with the eternal
wisdom, Plato's world of ideas. All the rest is the speculation of
schoolboys for schoolboys.

A. E. has been telling some yankee interviewer. Wall, tarnation strike
me!

--The schoolmen were schoolboys first, Stephen said superpolitely.
Aristotle was once Plato's schoolboy.

--And has remained so, one should hope, John Eglinton sedately said. One
can see him, a model schoolboy with his diploma under his arm.

He laughed again at the now smiling bearded face.

Formless spiritual. Father, Word and Holy Breath. Allfather, the
heavenly man. Hiesos Kristos, magician of the beautiful, the Logos who
suffers in us at every moment. This verily is that. I am the fire upon
the altar. I am the sacrificial butter.

Dunlop, Judge, the noblest Roman of them all, A.E., Arval, the Name
Ineffable, in heaven hight: K.H., their master, whose identity is no
secret to adepts. Brothers of the great white lodge always watching
to see if they can help. The Christ with the bridesister, moisture of
light, born of an ensouled virgin, repentant sophia, departed to the
plane of buddhi. The life esoteric is not for ordinary person. O.P.
must work off bad karma first. Mrs Cooper Oakley once glimpsed our very
illustrious sister H.P.B.'s elemental.

O, fie! Out on't! _Pfuiteufel!_ You naughtn't to look, missus, so you
naughtn't when a lady's ashowing of her elemental.

Mr Best entered, tall, young, mild, light. He bore in his hand with
grace a notebook, new, large, clean, bright.

--That model schoolboy, Stephen said, would find Hamlet's musings about
the afterlife of his princely soul, the improbable, insignificant and
undramatic monologue, as shallow as Plato's.

John Eglinton, frowning, said, waxing wroth:

--Upon my word it makes my blood boil to hear anyone compare Aristotle
with Plato.

--Which of the two, Stephen asked, would have banished me from his
commonwealth?

Unsheathe your dagger definitions. Horseness is the whatness of
allhorse. Streams of tendency and eons they worship. God: noise in the
street: very peripatetic. Space: what you damn well have to see. Through
spaces smaller than red globules of man's blood they creepycrawl after
Blake's buttocks into eternity of which this vegetable world is but a
shadow. Hold to the now, the here, through which all future plunges to
the past.

Mr Best came forward, amiable, towards his colleague.

--Haines is gone, he said.

--Is he?

--I was showing him Jubainville's book. He's quite enthusiastic, don't
you know, about Hyde's _Lovesongs of Connacht._ I couldn't bring him in
to hear the discussion. He's gone to Gill's to buy it.

     _Bound thee forth, my booklet, quick
     To greet the callous public.
     Writ, I ween, 'twas not my wish
     In lean unlovely English._

--The peatsmoke is going to his head, John Eglinton opined.

We feel in England. Penitent thief. Gone. I smoked his baccy. Green
twinkling stone. An emerald set in the ring of the sea.

--People do not know how dangerous lovesongs can be, the auric egg of
Russell warned occultly. The movements which work revolutions in the
world are born out of the dreams and visions in a peasant's heart on the
hillside. For them the earth is not an exploitable ground but the
living mother. The rarefied air of the academy and the arena produce the
sixshilling novel, the musichall song. France produces the finest flower
of corruption in Mallarme but the desirable life is revealed only to the
poor of heart, the life of Homer's Phaeacians.

From these words Mr Best turned an unoffending face to Stephen.

--Mallarme, don't you know, he said, has written those wonderful prose
poems Stephen MacKenna used to read to me in Paris. The one about
_Hamlet._ He says: _il se promÃ¨ne, lisant au livre de lui-mÃªme_, don't
you know, _reading the book of himself_. He describes _Hamlet_ given in
a French town, don't you know, a provincial town. They advertised it.

His free hand graciously wrote tiny signs in air.

     _HAMLET
     ou
     LE DISTRAIT
     PiÃ¨ce de Shakespeare_

He repeated to John Eglinton's newgathered frown:

--_PiÃ¨ce de Shakespeare_, don't you know. It's so French. The French
point of view. _Hamlet ou_...

--The absentminded beggar, Stephen ended.

John Eglinton laughed.

--Yes, I suppose it would be, he said. Excellent people, no doubt, but
distressingly shortsighted in some matters.

Sumptuous and stagnant exaggeration of murder.

--A deathsman of the soul Robert Greene called him, Stephen said. Not
for nothing was he a butcher's son, wielding the sledded poleaxe and
spitting in his palms. Nine lives are taken off for his father's one.
Our Father who art in purgatory. Khaki Hamlets don't hesitate to
shoot. The bloodboltered shambles in act five is a forecast of the
concentration camp sung by Mr Swinburne.

Cranly, I his mute orderly, following battles from afar.

_Whelps and dams of murderous foes whom none But we had spared..._

Between the Saxon smile and yankee yawp. The devil and the deep sea.

--He will have it that _Hamlet_ is a ghoststory, John Eglinton said
for Mr Best's behoof. Like the fat boy in Pickwick he wants to make our
flesh creep.

_List! List! O List!_

My flesh hears him: creeping, hears.

_If thou didst ever..._

--What is a ghost? Stephen said with tingling energy. One who has faded
into impalpability through death, through absence, through change of
manners. Elizabethan London lay as far from Stratford as corrupt Paris
lies from virgin Dublin. Who is the ghost from _limbo patrum_, returning
to the world that has forgotten him? Who is King Hamlet?

John Eglinton shifted his spare body, leaning back to judge.

Lifted.

--It is this hour of a day in mid June, Stephen said, begging with
a swift glance their hearing. The flag is up on the playhouse by the
bankside. The bear Sackerson growls in the pit near it, Paris garden.
Canvasclimbers who sailed with Drake chew their sausages among the
groundlings.

Local colour. Work in all you know. Make them accomplices.

--Shakespeare has left the huguenot's house in Silver street and walks
by the swanmews along the riverbank. But he does not stay to feed the
pen chivying her game of cygnets towards the rushes. The swan of Avon
has other thoughts.

Composition of place. Ignatius Loyola, make haste to help me!

--The play begins. A player comes on under the shadow, made up in the
castoff mail of a court buck, a wellset man with a bass voice. It is the
ghost, the king, a king and no king, and the player is Shakespeare who
has studied _Hamlet_ all the years of his life which were not vanity in
order to play the part of the spectre. He speaks the words to Burbage,
the young player who stands before him beyond the rack of cerecloth,
calling him by a name:

_Hamlet, I am thy father's spirit,_

bidding him list. To a son he speaks, the son of his soul, the prince,
young Hamlet and to the son of his body, Hamnet Shakespeare, who has
died in Stratford that his namesake may live for ever.

Is it possible that that player Shakespeare, a ghost by absence, and in
the vesture of buried Denmark, a ghost by death, speaking his own words
to his own son's name (had Hamnet Shakespeare lived he would have been
prince Hamlet's twin), is it possible, I want to know, or probable that
he did not draw or foresee the logical conclusion of those premises: you
are the dispossessed son: I am the murdered father: your mother is the
guilty queen, Ann Shakespeare, born Hathaway?

--But this prying into the family life of a great man, Russell began
impatiently.

Art thou there, truepenny?

--Interesting only to the parish clerk. I mean, we have the plays. I
mean when we read the poetry of _King Lear_ what is it to us how the
poet lived? As for living our servants can do that for us, Villiers de
l'Isle has said. Peeping and prying into greenroom gossip of the day,
the poet's drinking, the poet's debts. We have _King Lear_: and it is
immortal.

Mr Best's face, appealed to, agreed.

_Flow over them with your waves and with your waters, Mananaan, Mananaan
MacLir..._

How now, sirrah, that pound he lent you when you were hungry?

Marry, I wanted it.

Take thou this noble.

Go to! You spent most of it in Georgina Johnson's bed, clergyman's
daughter. Agenbite of inwit.

Do you intend to pay it back?

O, yes.

When? Now?

Well... No.

When, then?

I paid my way. I paid my way.

Steady on. He's from beyant Boyne water. The northeast corner. You owe
it.

Wait. Five months. Molecules all change. I am other I now. Other I got
pound.

Buzz. Buzz.

But I, entelechy, form of forms, am I by memory because under
everchanging forms.

I that sinned and prayed and fasted.

A child Conmee saved from pandies.

I, I and I. I.

A.E.I.O.U.

--Do you mean to fly in the face of the tradition of three centuries?
John Eglinton's carping voice asked. Her ghost at least has been laid
for ever. She died, for literature at least, before she was born.

--She died, Stephen retorted, sixtyseven years after she was born. She
saw him into and out of the world. She took his first embraces. She bore
his children and she laid pennies on his eyes to keep his eyelids closed
when he lay on his deathbed.

Mother's deathbed. Candle. The sheeted mirror. Who brought me into
this world lies there, bronzelidded, under few cheap flowers. _Liliata
rutilantium._

I wept alone.

John Eglinton looked in the tangled glowworm of his lamp.

--The world believes that Shakespeare made a mistake, he said, and got
out of it as quickly and as best he could.

--Bosh! Stephen said rudely. A man of genius makes no mistakes. His
errors are volitional and are the portals of discovery.

Portals of discovery opened to let in the quaker librarian,
softcreakfooted, bald, eared and assiduous.

--A shrew, John Eglinton said shrewdly, is not a useful portal of
discovery, one should imagine. What useful discovery did Socrates learn
from Xanthippe?

--Dialectic, Stephen answered: and from his mother how to bring thoughts
into the world. What he learnt from his other wife Myrto (_absit
nomen!_), Socratididion's Epipsychidion, no man, not a woman, will ever
know. But neither the midwife's lore nor the caudlelectures saved him
from the archons of Sinn Fein and their naggin of hemlock.

--But Ann Hathaway? Mr Best's quiet voice said forgetfully. Yes, we seem
to be forgetting her as Shakespeare himself forgot her.

His look went from brooder's beard to carper's skull, to remind, to
chide them not unkindly, then to the baldpink lollard costard, guiltless
though maligned.

--He had a good groatsworth of wit, Stephen said, and no truant memory.
He carried a memory in his wallet as he trudged to Romeville whistling
_The girl I left behind me._ If the earthquake did not time it we should
know where to place poor Wat, sitting in his form, the cry of hounds,
the studded bridle and her blue windows. That memory, _Venus and
Adonis_, lay in the bedchamber of every light-of-love in London.
Is Katharine the shrew illfavoured? Hortensio calls her young and
beautiful. Do you think the writer of _Antony and Cleopatra_, a
passionate pilgrim, had his eyes in the back of his head that he chose
the ugliest doxy in all Warwickshire to lie withal? Good: he left her
and gained the world of men. But his boywomen are the women of a boy.
Their life, thought, speech are lent them by males. He chose badly? He
was chosen, it seems to me. If others have their will Ann hath a way.
By cock, she was to blame. She put the comether on him, sweet and
twentysix. The greyeyed goddess who bends over the boy Adonis, stooping
to conquer, as prologue to the swelling act, is a boldfaced Stratford
wench who tumbles in a cornfield a lover younger than herself.

And my turn? When?

Come!

--Ryefield, Mr Best said brightly, gladly, raising his new book, gladly,
brightly.

He murmured then with blond delight for all:

_Between the acres of the rye These pretty countryfolk would lie._

Paris: the wellpleased pleaser.

A tall figure in bearded homespun rose from shadow and unveiled its
cooperative watch.

--I am afraid I am due at the _Homestead._

Whither away? Exploitable ground.

--Are you going? John Eglinton's active eyebrows asked. Shall we see you
at Moore's tonight? Piper is coming.

--Piper! Mr Best piped. Is Piper back?

Peter Piper pecked a peck of pick of peck of pickled pepper.

--I don't know if I can. Thursday. We have our meeting. If I can get
away in time.

Yogibogeybox in Dawson chambers. _Isis Unveiled._ Their Pali book we
tried to pawn. Crosslegged under an umbrel umbershoot he thrones an
Aztec logos, functioning on astral levels, their oversoul, mahamahatma.
The faithful hermetists await the light, ripe for chelaship,
ringroundabout him. Louis H. Victory. T. Caulfield Irwin. Lotus ladies
tend them i'the eyes, their pineal glands aglow. Filled with his god,
he thrones, Buddh under plantain. Gulfer of souls, engulfer. Hesouls,
shesouls, shoals of souls. Engulfed with wailing creecries, whirled,
whirling, they bewail.

     _In quintessential triviality
     For years in this fleshcase a shesoul dwelt._

--They say we are to have a literary surprise, the quaker librarian
said, friendly and earnest. Mr Russell, rumour has it, is gathering
together a sheaf of our younger poets' verses. We are all looking
forward anxiously.

Anxiously he glanced in the cone of lamplight where three faces,
lighted, shone.

See this. Remember.

Stephen looked down on a wide headless caubeen, hung on his
ashplanthandle over his knee. My casque and sword. Touch lightly with
two index fingers. Aristotle's experiment. One or two? Necessity is that
in virtue of which it is impossible that one can be otherwise. Argal,
one hat is one hat.

Listen.

Young Colum and Starkey. George Roberts is doing the commercial part.
Longworth will give it a good puff in the _Express._ O, will he? I liked
Colum's _Drover._ Yes, I think he has that queer thing genius. Do you
think he has genius really? Yeats admired his line: _As in wild earth
a Grecian vase_. Did he? I hope you'll be able to come tonight. Malachi
Mulligan is coming too. Moore asked him to bring Haines. Did you hear
Miss Mitchell's joke about Moore and Martyn? That Moore is Martyn's
wild oats? Awfully clever, isn't it? They remind one of Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza. Our national epic has yet to be written, Dr Sigerson says.
Moore is the man for it. A knight of the rueful countenance here in
Dublin. With a saffron kilt? O'Neill Russell? O, yes, he must speak the
grand old tongue. And his Dulcinea? James Stephens is doing some clever
sketches. We are becoming important, it seems.

Cordelia. _Cordoglio._ Lir's loneliest daughter.

Nookshotten. Now your best French polish.

--Thank you very much, Mr Russell, Stephen said, rising. If you will be
so kind as to give the letter to Mr Norman...

--O, yes. If he considers it important it will go in. We have so much
correspondence.

--I understand, Stephen said. Thanks.

God ild you. The pigs' paper. Bullockbefriending.

Synge has promised me an article for _Dana_ too. Are we going to be
read? I feel we are. The Gaelic league wants something in Irish. I hope
you will come round tonight. Bring Starkey.

Stephen sat down.

The quaker librarian came from the leavetakers. Blushing, his mask said:

--Mr Dedalus, your views are most illuminating.

He creaked to and fro, tiptoing up nearer heaven by the altitude of a
chopine, and, covered by the noise of outgoing, said low:

--Is it your view, then, that she was not faithful to the poet?

Alarmed face asks me. Why did he come? Courtesy or an inward light?

--Where there is a reconciliation, Stephen said, there must have been
first a sundering.

--Yes.

Christfox in leather trews, hiding, a runaway in blighted treeforks,
from hue and cry. Knowing no vixen, walking lonely in the chase. Women
he won to him, tender people, a whore of Babylon, ladies of justices,
bully tapsters' wives. Fox and geese. And in New Place a slack
dishonoured body that once was comely, once as sweet, as fresh as
cinnamon, now her leaves falling, all, bare, frighted of the narrow
grave and unforgiven.

--Yes. So you think...

The door closed behind the outgoer.

Rest suddenly possessed the discreet vaulted cell, rest of warm and
brooding air.

A vestal's lamp.

Here he ponders things that were not: what Caesar would have lived to do
had he believed the soothsayer: what might have been: possibilities of
the possible as possible: things not known: what name Achilles bore when
he lived among women.

Coffined thoughts around me, in mummycases, embalmed in spice of words.
Thoth, god of libraries, a birdgod, moonycrowned. And I heard the
voice of that Egyptian highpriest. _In painted chambers loaded with
tilebooks._

They are still. Once quick in the brains of men. Still: but an itch of
death is in them, to tell me in my ear a maudlin tale, urge me to wreak
their will.

--Certainly, John Eglinton mused, of all great men he is the most
enigmatic. We know nothing but that he lived and suffered. Not even so
much. Others abide our question. A shadow hangs over all the rest.

--But _Hamlet_ is so personal, isn't it? Mr Best pleaded. I mean, a kind
of private paper, don't you know, of his private life. I mean, I don't
care a button, don't you know, who is killed or who is guilty...

He rested an innocent book on the edge of the desk, smiling his
defiance. His private papers in the original. _Ta an bad ar an tir. Taim
in mo shagart_. Put beurla on it, littlejohn.

Quoth littlejohn Eglinton:

--I was prepared for paradoxes from what Malachi Mulligan told us but
I may as well warn you that if you want to shake my belief that
Shakespeare is Hamlet you have a stern task before you.

Bear with me.

Stephen withstood the bane of miscreant eyes glinting stern under
wrinkled brows. A basilisk. _E quando vede l'uomo l'attosca_. Messer
Brunetto, I thank thee for the word.

--As we, or mother Dana, weave and unweave our bodies, Stephen said,
from day to day, their molecules shuttled to and fro, so does the artist
weave and unweave his image. And as the mole on my right breast is where
it was when I was born, though all my body has been woven of new stuff
time after time, so through the ghost of the unquiet father the image
of the unliving son looks forth. In the intense instant of imagination,
when the mind, Shelley says, is a fading coal, that which I was is that
which I am and that which in possibility I may come to be. So in the
future, the sister of the past, I may see myself as I sit here now but
by reflection from that which then I shall be.

Drummond of Hawthornden helped you at that stile.

--Yes, Mr Best said youngly. I feel Hamlet quite young. The bitterness
might be from the father but the passages with Ophelia are surely from
the son.

Has the wrong sow by the lug. He is in my father. I am in his son.

--That mole is the last to go, Stephen said, laughing.

John Eglinton made a nothing pleasing mow.

--If that were the birthmark of genius, he said, genius would be a
drug in the market. The plays of Shakespeare's later years which Renan
admired so much breathe another spirit.

--The spirit of reconciliation, the quaker librarian breathed.

--There can be no reconciliation, Stephen said, if there has not been a
sundering.

Said that.

--If you want to know what are the events which cast their shadow over
the hell of time of _King Lear, Othello, Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida,_
look to see when and how the shadow lifts. What softens the heart of a
man, shipwrecked in storms dire, Tried, like another Ulysses, Pericles,
prince of Tyre?

Head, redconecapped, buffeted, brineblinded.

--A child, a girl, placed in his arms, Marina.

--The leaning of sophists towards the bypaths of apocrypha is a constant
quantity, John Eglinton detected. The highroads are dreary but they lead
to the town.

Good Bacon: gone musty. Shakespeare Bacon's wild oats. Cypherjugglers
going the highroads. Seekers on the great quest. What town, good
masters? Mummed in names: A. E., eon: Magee, John Eglinton. East of the
sun, west of the moon: _Tir na n-og_. Booted the twain and staved.

_How many miles to Dublin? Three score and ten, sir. Will we be there by
candlelight?_

--Mr Brandes accepts it, Stephen said, as the first play of the closing
period.

--Does he? What does Mr Sidney Lee, or Mr Simon Lazarus as some aver his
name is, say of it?

--Marina, Stephen said, a child of storm, Miranda, a wonder, Perdita,
that which was lost. What was lost is given back to him: his daughter's
child. _My dearest wife_, Pericles says, _was like this maid._ Will any
man love the daughter if he has not loved the mother?

--The art of being a grandfather, Mr Best gan murmur. _l'art d'Ãªtre
grand_...

--Will he not see reborn in her, with the memory of his own youth added,
another image?

Do you know what you are talking about? Love, yes. Word known to all
men. Amor vero aliquid alicui bonum vult unde et ea quae concupiscimus
...

--His own image to a man with that queer thing genius is the standard of
all experience, material and moral. Such an appeal will touch him. The
images of other males of his blood will repel him. He will see in them
grotesque attempts of nature to foretell or to repeat himself.

The benign forehead of the quaker librarian enkindled rosily with hope.

--I hope Mr Dedalus will work out his theory for the enlightenment of
the public. And we ought to mention another Irish commentator, Mr George
Bernard Shaw. Nor should we forget Mr Frank Harris. His articles on
Shakespeare in the _Saturday Review_ were surely brilliant. Oddly
enough he too draws for us an unhappy relation with the dark lady of the
sonnets. The favoured rival is William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. I own
that if the poet must be rejected such a rejection would seem more in
harmony with--what shall I say?--our notions of what ought not to have
been.

Felicitously he ceased and held a meek head among them, auk's egg, prize
of their fray.

He thous and thees her with grave husbandwords. Dost love, Miriam? Dost
love thy man?

--That may be too, Stephen said. There's a saying of Goethe's which Mr
Magee likes to quote. Beware of what you wish for in youth because
you will get it in middle life. Why does he send to one who is
a _buonaroba,_ a bay where all men ride, a maid of honour with a
scandalous girlhood, a lordling to woo for him? He was himself a lord
of language and had made himself a coistrel gentleman and he had written
_Romeo and Juliet_. Why? Belief in himself has been untimely killed. He
was overborne in a cornfield first (ryefield, I should say) and he will
never be a victor in his own eyes after nor play victoriously the game
of laugh and lie down. Assumed dongiovannism will not save him. No later
undoing will undo the first undoing. The tusk of the boar has wounded
him there where love lies ableeding. If the shrew is worsted yet there
remains to her woman's invisible weapon. There is, I feel in the words,
some goad of the flesh driving him into a new passion, a darker shadow
of the first, darkening even his own understanding of himself. A like
fate awaits him and the two rages commingle in a whirlpool.

They list. And in the porches of their ears I pour.

--The soul has been before stricken mortally, a poison poured in the
porch of a sleeping ear. But those who are done to death in sleep cannot
know the manner of their quell unless their Creator endow their souls
with that knowledge in the life to come. The poisoning and the beast
with two backs that urged it King Hamlet's ghost could not know of were
he not endowed with knowledge by his creator. That is why the speech
(his lean unlovely English) is always turned elsewhere, backward.
Ravisher and ravished, what he would but would not, go with him from
Lucrece's bluecircled ivory globes to Imogen's breast, bare, with its
mole cinquespotted. He goes back, weary of the creation he has piled up
to hide him from himself, an old dog licking an old sore. But, because
loss is his gain, he passes on towards eternity in undiminished
personality, untaught by the wisdom he has written or by the laws he
has revealed. His beaver is up. He is a ghost, a shadow now, the wind by
Elsinore's rocks or what you will, the sea's voice, a voice heard
only in the heart of him who is the substance of his shadow, the son
consubstantial with the father.

--Amen! was responded from the doorway.

Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?

_Entr'acte_.

A ribald face, sullen as a dean's, Buck Mulligan came forward, then
blithe in motley, towards the greeting of their smiles. My telegram.

--You were speaking of the gaseous vertebrate, if I mistake not? he
asked of Stephen.

Primrosevested he greeted gaily with his doffed Panama as with a bauble.

They make him welcome. _Was Du verlachst wirst Du noch dienen._

Brood of mockers: Photius, pseudomalachi, Johann Most.

He Who Himself begot middler the Holy Ghost and Himself sent Himself,
Agenbuyer, between Himself and others, Who, put upon by His fiends,
stripped and whipped, was nailed like bat to barndoor, starved on
crosstree, Who let Him bury, stood up, harrowed hell, fared into heaven
and there these nineteen hundred years sitteth on the right hand of His
Own Self but yet shall come in the latter day to doom the quick and dead
when all the quick shall be dead already.

Glo--o--ri--a in ex--cel--sis De--o.

He lifts his hands. Veils fall. O, flowers! Bells with bells with bells
aquiring.

--Yes, indeed, the quaker librarian said. A most instructive discussion.
Mr Mulligan, I'll be bound, has his theory too of the play and of
Shakespeare. All sides of life should be represented.

He smiled on all sides equally.

Buck Mulligan thought, puzzled:

--Shakespeare? he said. I seem to know the name.

A flying sunny smile rayed in his loose features.

--To be sure, he said, remembering brightly. The chap that writes like
Synge.

Mr Best turned to him.

--Haines missed you, he said. Did you meet him? He'll see you after at
the D. B. C. He's gone to Gill's to buy Hyde's _Lovesongs of Connacht_.

--I came through the museum, Buck Mulligan said. Was he here?

--The bard's fellowcountrymen, John Eglinton answered, are rather tired
perhaps of our brilliancies of theorising. I hear that an actress played
Hamlet for the fourhundredandeighth time last night in Dublin. Vining
held that the prince was a woman. Has no-one made him out to be an
Irishman? Judge Barton, I believe, is searching for some clues. He
swears (His Highness not His Lordship) by saint Patrick.

--The most brilliant of all is that story of Wilde's, Mr Best said,
lifting his brilliant notebook. That _Portrait of Mr W. H._ where he
proves that the sonnets were written by a Willie Hughes, a man all hues.

--For Willie Hughes, is it not? the quaker librarian asked.

Or Hughie Wills? Mr William Himself. W. H.: who am I?

--I mean, for Willie Hughes, Mr Best said, amending his gloss easily. Of
course it's all paradox, don't you know, Hughes and hews and hues,
the colour, but it's so typical the way he works it out. It's the very
essence of Wilde, don't you know. The light touch.

His glance touched their faces lightly as he smiled, a blond ephebe.
Tame essence of Wilde.

You're darned witty. Three drams of usquebaugh you drank with Dan
Deasy's ducats.

How much did I spend? O, a few shillings.

For a plump of pressmen. Humour wet and dry.

Wit. You would give your five wits for youth's proud livery he pranks
in. Lineaments of gratified desire.

There be many mo. Take her for me. In pairing time. Jove, a cool ruttime
send them. Yea, turtledove her.

Eve. Naked wheatbellied sin. A snake coils her, fang in's kiss.

--Do you think it is only a paradox? the quaker librarian was asking.
The mocker is never taken seriously when he is most serious.

They talked seriously of mocker's seriousness.

Buck Mulligan's again heavy face eyed Stephen awhile. Then, his head
wagging, he came near, drew a folded telegram from his pocket. His
mobile lips read, smiling with new delight.

--Telegram! he said. Wonderful inspiration! Telegram! A papal bull!

He sat on a corner of the unlit desk, reading aloud joyfully:

--_The sentimentalist is he who would enjoy without incurring the
immense debtorship for a thing done._ Signed: Dedalus. Where did you
launch it from? The kips? No. College Green. Have you drunk the four
quid? The aunt is going to call on your unsubstantial father. Telegram!
Malachi Mulligan, The Ship, lower Abbey street. O, you peerless mummer!
O, you priestified Kinchite!

Joyfully he thrust message and envelope into a pocket but keened in a
querulous brogue:

--It's what I'm telling you, mister honey, it's queer and sick we were,
Haines and myself, the time himself brought it in. 'Twas murmur we did
for a gallus potion would rouse a friar, I'm thinking, and he limp with
leching. And we one hour and two hours and three hours in Connery's
sitting civil waiting for pints apiece.

He wailed:

--And we to be there, mavrone, and you to be unbeknownst sending us your
conglomerations the way we to have our tongues out a yard long like the
drouthy clerics do be fainting for a pussful.

Stephen laughed.

Quickly, warningfully Buck Mulligan bent down.

--The tramper Synge is looking for you, he said, to murder you. He
heard you pissed on his halldoor in Glasthule. He's out in pampooties to
murder you.

--Me! Stephen exclaimed. That was your contribution to literature.

Buck Mulligan gleefully bent back, laughing to the dark eavesdropping
ceiling.

--Murder you! he laughed.

Harsh gargoyle face that warred against me over our mess of hash
of lights in rue Saint-AndrÃ©-des-Arts. In words of words for words,
palabras. Oisin with Patrick. Faunman he met in Clamart woods,
brandishing a winebottle. _C'est vendredi saint!_ Murthering Irish. His
image, wandering, he met. I mine. I met a fool i'the forest.

--Mr Lyster, an attendant said from the door ajar.

--... in which everyone can find his own. So Mr Justice Madden in his
_Diary of Master William Silence_ has found the hunting terms... Yes?
What is it?

--There's a gentleman here, sir, the attendant said, coming forward and
offering a card. From the _Freeman._ He wants to see the files of the
_Kilkenny People_ for last year.

--Certainly, certainly, certainly. Is the gentleman?...

He took the eager card, glanced, not saw, laid down unglanced, looked,
asked, creaked, asked:

--Is he?... O, there!

Brisk in a galliard he was off, out. In the daylit corridor he talked
with voluble pains of zeal, in duty bound, most fair, most kind, most
honest broadbrim.

--This gentleman? _Freeman's Journal? Kilkenny People?_ To be sure. Good
day, sir. _Kilkenny_... We have certainly...

A patient silhouette waited, listening.

--All the leading provincial... _Northern Whig, Cork Examiner,
Enniscorthy Guardian,_ 1903... Will you please?... Evans, conduct this
gentleman... If you just follow the atten... Or, please allow me...
This way... Please, sir...

Voluble, dutiful, he led the way to all the provincial papers, a bowing
dark figure following his hasty heels.

The door closed.

--The sheeny! Buck Mulligan cried.

He jumped up and snatched the card.

--What's his name? Ikey Moses? Bloom.

He rattled on:

--Jehovah, collector of prepuces, is no more. I found him over in the
museum where I went to hail the foamborn Aphrodite. The Greek mouth that
has never been twisted in prayer. Every day we must do homage to her.
_Life of life, thy lips enkindle._

Suddenly he turned to Stephen:

--He knows you. He knows your old fellow. O, I fear me, he is Greeker
than the Greeks. His pale Galilean eyes were upon her mesial groove.
Venus Kallipyge. O, the thunder of those loins! _The god pursuing the
maiden hid_.

--We want to hear more, John Eglinton decided with Mr Best's approval.
We begin to be interested in Mrs S. Till now we had thought of her, if
at all, as a patient Griselda, a Penelope stayathome.

--Antisthenes, pupil of Gorgias, Stephen said, took the palm of beauty
from Kyrios Menelaus' brooddam, Argive Helen, the wooden mare of Troy
in whom a score of heroes slept, and handed it to poor Penelope. Twenty
years he lived in London and, during part of that time, he drew a salary
equal to that of the lord chancellor of Ireland. His life was rich. His
art, more than the art of feudalism as Walt Whitman called it, is the
art of surfeit. Hot herringpies, green mugs of sack, honeysauces, sugar
of roses, marchpane, gooseberried pigeons, ringocandies. Sir Walter
Raleigh, when they arrested him, had half a million francs on his
back including a pair of fancy stays. The gombeenwoman Eliza Tudor had
underlinen enough to vie with her of Sheba. Twenty years he dallied
there between conjugial love and its chaste delights and scortatory love
and its foul pleasures. You know Manningham's story of the burgher's
wife who bade Dick Burbage to her bed after she had seen him in _Richard
III_ and how Shakespeare, overhearing, without more ado about nothing,
took the cow by the horns and, when Burbage came knocking at the gate,
answered from the capon's blankets: _William the conqueror came before
Richard III_. And the gay lakin, mistress Fitton, mount and cry O,
and his dainty birdsnies, lady Penelope Rich, a clean quality woman is
suited for a player, and the punks of the bankside, a penny a time.

Cours la Reine. _Encore vingt sous. Nous ferons de petites cochonneries.
Minette? Tu veux?_

--The height of fine society. And sir William Davenant of oxford's
mother with her cup of canary for any cockcanary.

Buck Mulligan, his pious eyes upturned, prayed:

--Blessed Margaret Mary Anycock!

--And Harry of six wives' daughter. And other lady friends from
neighbour seats as Lawn Tennyson, gentleman poet, sings. But all those
twenty years what do you suppose poor Penelope in Stratford was doing
behind the diamond panes?

Do and do. Thing done. In a rosery of Fetter lane of Gerard, herbalist,
he walks, greyedauburn. An azured harebell like her veins. Lids of
Juno's eyes, violets. He walks. One life is all. One body. Do. But do.
Afar, in a reek of lust and squalor, hands are laid on whiteness.

Buck Mulligan rapped John Eglinton's desk sharply.

--Whom do you suspect? he challenged.

--Say that he is the spurned lover in the sonnets. Once spurned twice
spurned. But the court wanton spurned him for a lord, his dearmylove.

Love that dare not speak its name.

--As an Englishman, you mean, John sturdy Eglinton put in, he loved a
lord.

Old wall where sudden lizards flash. At Charenton I watched them.

--It seems so, Stephen said, when he wants to do for him, and for all
other and singular uneared wombs, the holy office an ostler does for the
stallion. Maybe, like Socrates, he had a midwife to mother as he had a
shrew to wife. But she, the giglot wanton, did not break a bedvow. Two
deeds are rank in that ghost's mind: a broken vow and the dullbrained
yokel on whom her favour has declined, deceased husband's brother. Sweet
Ann, I take it, was hot in the blood. Once a wooer, twice a wooer.

Stephen turned boldly in his chair.

--The burden of proof is with you not with me, he said frowning. If you
deny that in the fifth scene of _Hamlet_ he has branded her with infamy
tell me why there is no mention of her during the thirtyfour years
between the day she married him and the day she buried him. All those
women saw their men down and under: Mary, her goodman John, Ann, her
poor dear Willun, when he went and died on her, raging that he was the
first to go, Joan, her four brothers, Judith, her husband and all her
sons, Susan, her husband too, while Susan's daughter, Elizabeth, to use
granddaddy's words, wed her second, having killed her first.

O, yes, mention there is. In the years when he was living richly in
royal London to pay a debt she had to borrow forty shillings from her
father's shepherd. Explain you then. Explain the swansong too wherein he
has commended her to posterity.

He faced their silence.

     To whom thus Eglinton:
     You mean the will.
     But that has been explained, I believe, by jurists.
     She was entitled to her widow's dower
     At common law. His legal knowledge was great
     Our judges tell us.
     Him Satan fleers,
     Mocker:
     And therefore he left out her name
     From the first draft but he did not leave out
     The presents for his granddaughter, for his daughters,
     For his sister, for his old cronies in Stratford
     And in London. And therefore when he was urged,
     As I believe, to name her
     He left her his
     Secondbest
     Bed.
     _Punkt._
     Leftherhis
     Secondbest
     Leftherhis
     Bestabed
     Secabest
     Leftabed.


Woa!

--Pretty countryfolk had few chattels then, John Eglinton observed, as
they have still if our peasant plays are true to type.

--He was a rich country gentleman, Stephen said, with a coat of arms
and landed estate at Stratford and a house in Ireland yard, a capitalist
shareholder, a bill promoter, a tithefarmer. Why did he not leave her
his best bed if he wished her to snore away the rest of her nights in
peace?

--It is clear that there were two beds, a best and a secondbest, Mr
Secondbest Best said finely.

--_Separatio a mensa et a thalamo_, bettered Buck Mulligan and was
smiled on.

--Antiquity mentions famous beds, Second Eglinton puckered, bedsmiling.
Let me think.

--Antiquity mentions that Stagyrite schoolurchin and bald heathen sage,
Stephen said, who when dying in exile frees and endows his slaves, pays
tribute to his elders, wills to be laid in earth near the bones of his
dead wife and bids his friends be kind to an old mistress (don't forget
Nell Gwynn Herpyllis) and let her live in his villa.

--Do you mean he died so? Mr Best asked with slight concern. I mean...

--He died dead drunk, Buck Mulligan capped. A quart of ale is a dish for
a king. O, I must tell you what Dowden said!

--What? asked Besteglinton.

William Shakespeare and company, limited. The people's William. For
terms apply: E. Dowden, Highfield house...

--Lovely! Buck Mulligan suspired amorously. I asked him what he thought
of the charge of pederasty brought against the bard. He lifted his hands
and said: _All we can say is that life ran very high in those days._
Lovely!

Catamite.

--The sense of beauty leads us astray, said beautifulinsadness Best to
ugling Eglinton.

Steadfast John replied severe:

--The doctor can tell us what those words mean. You cannot eat your cake
and have it.

Sayest thou so? Will they wrest from us, from me, the palm of beauty?

--And the sense of property, Stephen said. He drew Shylock out of his
own long pocket. The son of a maltjobber and moneylender he was himself
a cornjobber and moneylender, with ten tods of corn hoarded in the
famine riots. His borrowers are no doubt those divers of worship
mentioned by Chettle Falstaff who reported his uprightness of dealing.
He sued a fellowplayer for the price of a few bags of malt and exacted
his pound of flesh in interest for every money lent. How else could
Aubrey's ostler and callboy get rich quick? All events brought grist to
his mill. Shylock chimes with the jewbaiting that followed the hanging
and quartering of the queen's leech Lopez, his jew's heart being plucked
forth while the sheeny was yet alive: _Hamlet_ and _Macbeth_ with
the coming to the throne of a Scotch philosophaster with a turn for
witchroasting. The lost armada is his jeer in _Love's Labour Lost_.
His pageants, the histories, sail fullbellied on a tide of Mafeking
enthusiasm. Warwickshire jesuits are tried and we have a porter's theory
of equivocation. The _Sea Venture_ comes home from Bermudas and the play
Renan admired is written with Patsy Caliban, our American cousin.
The sugared sonnets follow Sidney's. As for fay Elizabeth, otherwise
carrotty Bess, the gross virgin who inspired _The Merry Wives of
Windsor_, let some meinherr from Almany grope his life long for deephid
meanings in the depths of the buckbasket.

I think you're getting on very nicely. Just mix up a mixture of
theolologicophilolological. _Mingo, minxi, mictum, mingere._

--Prove that he was a jew, John Eglinton dared,'expectantly. Your dean
of studies holds he was a holy Roman.

_Sufflaminandus sum._

--He was made in Germany, Stephen replied, as the champion French
polisher of Italian scandals.

--A myriadminded man, Mr Best reminded. Coleridge called him
myriadminded.

_Amplius. In societate humana hoc est maxime necessarium ut sit amicitia
inter multos._

--Saint Thomas, Stephen began...

--_Ora pro nobis_, Monk Mulligan groaned, sinking to a chair.

There he keened a wailing rune.

--_Pogue mahone! Acushla machree!_ It's destroyed we are from this day!
It's destroyed we are surely!

All smiled their smiles.

--Saint Thomas, Stephen smiling said, whose gorbellied works I enjoy
reading in the original, writing of incest from a standpoint different
from that of the new Viennese school Mr Magee spoke of, likens it in his
wise and curious way to an avarice of the emotions. He means that the
love so given to one near in blood is covetously withheld from some
stranger who, it may be, hungers for it. Jews, whom christians tax with
avarice, are of all races the most given to intermarriage. Accusations
are made in anger. The christian laws which built up the hoards of the
jews (for whom, as for the lollards, storm was shelter) bound their
affections too with hoops of steel. Whether these be sins or virtues old
Nobodaddy will tell us at doomsday leet. But a man who holds so tightly
to what he calls his rights over what he calls his debts will hold
tightly also to what he calls his rights over her whom he calls his
wife. No sir smile neighbour shall covet his ox or his wife or his
manservant or his maidservant or his jackass.

--Or his jennyass, Buck Mulligan antiphoned.

--Gentle Will is being roughly handled, gentle Mr Best said gently.

--Which will? gagged sweetly Buck Mulligan. We are getting mixed.

--The will to live, John Eglinton philosophised, for poor Ann, Will's
widow, is the will to die.

_--Requiescat!_ Stephen prayed.

     _What of all the will to do?
     It has vanished long ago..._

--She lies laid out in stark stiffness in that secondbest bed, the
mobled queen, even though you prove that a bed in those days was as
rare as a motorcar is now and that its carvings were the wonder of seven
parishes. In old age she takes up with gospellers (one stayed with her
at New Place and drank a quart of sack the town council paid for but in
which bed he slept it skills not to ask) and heard she had a soul. She
read or had read to her his chapbooks preferring them to the _Merry
Wives_ and, loosing her nightly waters on the jordan, she thought
over _Hooks and Eyes for Believers' Breeches_ and _The most Spiritual
Snuffbox to Make the Most Devout Souls Sneeze_. Venus has twisted her
lips in prayer. Agenbite of inwit: remorse of conscience. It is an age
of exhausted whoredom groping for its god.

--History shows that to be true, _inquit Eglintonus Chronolologos_. The
ages succeed one another. But we have it on high authority that a man's
worst enemies shall be those of his own house and family. I feel that
Russell is right. What do we care for his wife or father? I should say
that only family poets have family lives. Falstaff was not a family man.
I feel that the fat knight is his supreme creation.

Lean, he lay back. Shy, deny thy kindred, the unco guid. Shy, supping
with the godless, he sneaks the cup. A sire in Ultonian Antrim bade it
him. Visits him here on quarter days. Mr Magee, sir, there's a gentleman
to see you. Me? Says he's your father, sir. Give me my Wordsworth. Enter
Magee Mor Matthew, a rugged rough rugheaded kern, in strossers with
a buttoned codpiece, his nether stocks bemired with clauber of ten
forests, a wand of wilding in his hand.

Your own? He knows your old fellow. The widower.

Hurrying to her squalid deathlair from gay Paris on the quayside I
touched his hand. The voice, new warmth, speaking. Dr Bob Kenny is
attending her. The eyes that wish me well. But do not know me.

--A father, Stephen said, battling against hopelessness, is a necessary
evil. He wrote the play in the months that followed his father's death.
If you hold that he, a greying man with two marriageable daughters, with
thirtyfive years of life, _nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita_, with
fifty of experience, is the beardless undergraduate from Wittenberg then
you must hold that his seventyyear old mother is the lustful queen. No.
The corpse of John Shakespeare does not walk the night. From hour to
hour it rots and rots. He rests, disarmed of fatherhood, having devised
that mystical estate upon his son. Boccaccio's Calandrino was the first
and last man who felt himself with child. Fatherhood, in the sense of
conscious begetting, is unknown to man. It is a mystical estate, an
apostolic succession, from only begetter to only begotten. On that
mystery and not on the madonna which the cunning Italian intellect
flung to the mob of Europe the church is founded and founded irremovably
because founded, like the world, macro and microcosm, upon the void.
Upon incertitude, upon unlikelihood. _Amor matris_, subjective and
objective genitive, may be the only true thing in life. Paternity may be
a legal fiction. Who is the father of any son that any son should love
him or he any son?

What the hell are you driving at?

I know. Shut up. Blast you. I have reasons.

_Amplius. Adhuc. Iterum. Postea._

Are you condemned to do this?

--They are sundered by a bodily shame so steadfast that the criminal
annals of the world, stained with all other incests and bestialities,
hardly record its breach. Sons with mothers, sires with daughters,
lesbic sisters, loves that dare not speak their name, nephews with
grandmothers, jailbirds with keyholes, queens with prize bulls. The son
unborn mars beauty: born, he brings pain, divides affection, increases
care. He is a new male: his growth is his father's decline, his youth
his father's envy, his friend his father's enemy.

In rue Monsieur-le-Prince I thought it.

--What links them in nature? An instant of blind rut.

Am I a father? If I were?

Shrunken uncertain hand.

--Sabellius, the African, subtlest heresiarch of all the beasts of the
field, held that the Father was Himself His Own Son. The bulldog of
Aquin, with whom no word shall be impossible, refutes him. Well: if
the father who has not a son be not a father can the son who has not a
father be a son? When Rutlandbaconsouthamptonshakespeare or another poet
of the same name in the comedy of errors wrote _Hamlet_ he was not the
father of his own son merely but, being no more a son, he was and felt
himself the father of all his race, the father of his own grandfather,
the father of his unborn grandson who, by the same token, never was
born, for nature, as Mr Magee understands her, abhors perfection.

Eglintoneyes, quick with pleasure, looked up shybrightly. Gladly
glancing, a merry puritan, through the twisted eglantine.

Flatter. Rarely. But flatter.

--Himself his own father, Sonmulligan told himself. Wait. I am big with
child. I have an unborn child in my brain. Pallas Athena! A play! The
play's the thing! Let me parturiate!

He clasped his paunchbrow with both birthaiding hands.

--As for his family, Stephen said, his mother's name lives in the
forest of Arden. Her death brought from him the scene with Volumnia in
_Coriolanus._ His boyson's death is the deathscene of young Arthur in
_King John._ Hamlet, the black prince, is Hamnet Shakespeare. Who the
girls in _The Tempest_, in _Pericles,_ in _Winter's Tale_ are we know.
Who Cleopatra, fleshpot of Egypt, and Cressid and Venus are we may
guess. But there is another member of his family who is recorded.

--The plot thickens, John Eglinton said.

The quaker librarian, quaking, tiptoed in, quake, his mask, quake, with
haste, quake, quack.

Door closed. Cell. Day.

They list. Three. They.

I you he they.

Come, mess.

STEPHEN: He had three brothers, Gilbert, Edmund, Richard. Gilbert in his
old age told some cavaliers he got a pass for nowt from Maister Gatherer
one time mass he did and he seen his brud Maister Wull the playwriter up
in Lunnon in a wrastling play wud a man on's back. The playhouse sausage
filled Gilbert's soul. He is nowhere: but an Edmund and a Richard are
recorded in the works of sweet William.

MAGEEGLINJOHN: Names! What's in a name?

BEST: That is my name, Richard, don't you know. I hope you are going to
say a good word for Richard, don't you know, for my sake. _(Laughter)_


BUCKMULLIGAN: (_Piano, diminuendo_)

     _Then outspoke medical Dick
     To his comrade medical Davy..._

STEPHEN: In his trinity of black Wills, the villain shakebags, Iago,
Richard Crookback, Edmund in _King Lear_, two bear the wicked uncles'
names. Nay, that last play was written or being written while his
brother Edmund lay dying in Southwark.

BEST: I hope Edmund is going to catch it. I don't want Richard, my name
...

_(Laughter)_

QUAKERLYSTER: (_A tempo_) But he that filches from me my good name...

STEPHEN: _(Stringendo)_ He has hidden his own name, a fair name,
William, in the plays, a super here, a clown there, as a painter of old
Italy set his face in a dark corner of his canvas. He has revealed it in
the sonnets where there is Will in overplus. Like John o'Gaunt his name
is dear to him, as dear as the coat and crest he toadied for, on a bend
sable a spear or steeled argent, honorificabilitudinitatibus, dearer
than his glory of greatest shakescene in the country. What's in a name?
That is what we ask ourselves in childhood when we write the name that
we are told is ours. A star, a daystar, a firedrake, rose at his birth.
It shone by day in the heavens alone, brighter than Venus in the
night, and by night it shone over delta in Cassiopeia, the recumbent
constellation which is the signature of his initial among the stars. His
eyes watched it, lowlying on the horizon, eastward of the bear, as
he walked by the slumberous summer fields at midnight returning from
Shottery and from her arms.

Both satisfied. I too.

Don't tell them he was nine years old when it was quenched.

And from her arms.

Wait to be wooed and won. Ay, meacock. Who will woo you?

Read the skies. _Autontimorumenos. Bous Stephanoumenos._ Where's your
configuration? Stephen, Stephen, cut the bread even. S. D: _sua donna.
GiÃ : di lui. gelindo risolve di non amare_ S. D.

--What is that, Mr Dedalus? the quaker librarian asked. Was it a
celestial phenomenon?

--A star by night, Stephen said. A pillar of the cloud by day.

What more's to speak?

Stephen looked on his hat, his stick, his boots.

_Stephanos,_ my crown. My sword. His boots are spoiling the shape of my
feet. Buy a pair. Holes in my socks. Handkerchief too.

--You make good use of the name, John Eglinton allowed. Your own name is
strange enough. I suppose it explains your fantastical humour.

Me, Magee and Mulligan.

Fabulous artificer. The hawklike man. You flew. Whereto?
Newhaven-Dieppe, steerage passenger. Paris and back. Lapwing. Icarus.
_Pater, ait._ Seabedabbled, fallen, weltering. Lapwing you are. Lapwing
be.

Mr Best eagerquietly lifted his book to say:

--That's very interesting because that brother motive, don't you know,
we find also in the old Irish myths. Just what you say. The three
brothers Shakespeare. In Grimm too, don't you know, the fairytales. The
third brother that always marries the sleeping beauty and wins the best
prize.

Best of Best brothers. Good, better, best.

The quaker librarian springhalted near.

--I should like to know, he said, which brother you... I understand you
to suggest there was misconduct with one of the brothers... But perhaps
I am anticipating?

He caught himself in the act: looked at all: refrained.

An attendant from the doorway called:

--Mr Lyster! Father Dineen wants...

--O, Father Dineen! Directly.

Swiftly rectly creaking rectly rectly he was rectly gone.

John Eglinton touched the foil.

--Come, he said. Let us hear what you have to say of Richard and Edmund.
You kept them for the last, didn't you?

--In asking you to remember those two noble kinsmen nuncle Richie and
nuncle Edmund, Stephen answered, I feel I am asking too much perhaps. A
brother is as easily forgotten as an umbrella.

Lapwing.

Where is your brother? Apothecaries' hall. My whetstone. Him, then
Cranly, Mulligan: now these. Speech, speech. But act. Act speech. They
mock to try you. Act. Be acted on.

Lapwing.

I am tired of my voice, the voice of Esau. My kingdom for a drink.

On.

--You will say those names were already in the chronicles from which he
took the stuff of his plays. Why did he take them rather than others?
Richard, a whoreson crookback, misbegotten, makes love to a widowed Ann
(what's in a name?), woos and wins her, a whoreson merry widow. Richard
the conqueror, third brother, came after William the conquered. The
other four acts of that play hang limply from that first. Of all his
kings Richard is the only king unshielded by Shakespeare's reverence,
the angel of the world. Why is the underplot of _King Lear_ in which
Edmund figures lifted out of Sidney's _Arcadia_ and spatchcocked on to a
Celtic legend older than history?

--That was Will's way, John Eglinton defended. We should not now combine
a Norse saga with an excerpt from a novel by George Meredith. _Que
voulez-vous?_ Moore would say. He puts Bohemia on the seacoast and makes
Ulysses quote Aristotle.

--Why? Stephen answered himself. Because the theme of the false or
the usurping or the adulterous brother or all three in one is to
Shakespeare, what the poor are not, always with him. The note of
banishment, banishment from the heart, banishment from home, sounds
uninterruptedly from _The Two Gentlemen of Verona_ onward till Prospero
breaks his staff, buries it certain fathoms in the earth and drowns his
book. It doubles itself in the middle of his life, reflects itself in
another, repeats itself, protasis, epitasis, catastasis, catastrophe.
It repeats itself again when he is near the grave, when his married
daughter Susan, chip of the old block, is accused of adultery. But it
was the original sin that darkened his understanding, weakened his will
and left in him a strong inclination to evil. The words are those of
my lords bishops of Maynooth. An original sin and, like original sin,
committed by another in whose sin he too has sinned. It is between the
lines of his last written words, it is petrified on his tombstone under
which her four bones are not to be laid. Age has not withered it. Beauty
and peace have not done it away. It is in infinite variety everywhere in
the world he has created, in _Much Ado about Nothing_, twice in _As you
like It_, in _The Tempest_, in _Hamlet,_ in _Measure for Measure_--and
in all the other plays which I have not read.

He laughed to free his mind from his mind's bondage.

Judge Eglinton summed up.

--The truth is midway, he affirmed. He is the ghost and the prince. He
is all in all.

--He is, Stephen said. The boy of act one is the mature man of act five.
All in all. In _Cymbeline,_ in _Othello_ he is bawd and cuckold. He acts
and is acted on. Lover of an ideal or a perversion, like Jose he
kills the real Carmen. His unremitting intellect is the hornmad Iago
ceaselessly willing that the moor in him shall suffer.

--Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuck Mulligan clucked lewdly. O word of fear!

Dark dome received, reverbed.

--And what a character is Iago! undaunted John Eglinton exclaimed. When
all is said Dumas _fils_ (or is it Dumas _pÃ¨re?)_ is right. After God
Shakespeare has created most.

--Man delights him not nor woman neither, Stephen said. He returns after
a life of absence to that spot of earth where he was born, where he has
always been, man and boy, a silent witness and there, his journey of
life ended, he plants his mulberrytree in the earth. Then dies. The
motion is ended. Gravediggers bury Hamlet _(pÃ¨re?)_ and Hamlet _fils._
A king and a prince at last in death, with incidental music. And, what
though murdered and betrayed, bewept by all frail tender hearts for,
Dane or Dubliner, sorrow for the dead is the only husband from whom
they refuse to be divorced. If you like the epilogue look long on it:
prosperous Prospero, the good man rewarded, Lizzie, grandpa's lump of
love, and nuncle Richie, the bad man taken off by poetic justice to the
place where the bad niggers go. Strong curtain. He found in the world
without as actual what was in his world within as possible. Maeterlinck
says: _If Socrates leave his house today he will find the sage seated
on his doorstep. If Judas go forth tonight it is to Judas his steps
will tend._ Every life is many days, day after day. We walk through
ourselves, meeting robbers, ghosts, giants, old men, young men, wives,
widows, brothers-in-love, but always meeting ourselves. The playwright
who wrote the folio of this world and wrote it badly (He gave us light
first and the sun two days later), the lord of things as they are whom
the most Roman of catholics call _dio boia_, hangman god, is doubtless
all in all in all of us, ostler and butcher, and would be bawd and
cuckold too but that in the economy of heaven, foretold by Hamlet, there
are no more marriages, glorified man, an androgynous angel, being a wife
unto himself.

_--Eureka!_ Buck Mulligan cried. _Eureka!_

Suddenly happied he jumped up and reached in a stride John Eglinton's
desk.

--May I? he said. The Lord has spoken to Malachi.

He began to scribble on a slip of paper.

Take some slips from the counter going out.

--Those who are married, Mr Best, douce herald, said, all save one,
shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.

He laughed, unmarried, at Eglinton Johannes, of arts a bachelor.

Unwed, unfancied, ware of wiles, they fingerponder nightly each his
variorum edition of _The Taming of the Shrew._

--You are a delusion, said roundly John Eglinton to Stephen. You have
brought us all this way to show us a French triangle. Do you believe
your own theory?

--No, Stephen said promptly.

--Are you going to write it? Mr Best asked. You ought to make it a
dialogue, don't you know, like the Platonic dialogues Wilde wrote.

John Eclecticon doubly smiled.

--Well, in that case, he said, I don't see why you should expect payment
for it since you don't believe it yourself. Dowden believes there is
some mystery in _Hamlet_ but will say no more. Herr Bleibtreu, the man
Piper met in Berlin, who is working up that Rutland theory, believes
that the secret is hidden in the Stratford monument. He is going to
visit the present duke, Piper says, and prove to him that his ancestor
wrote the plays. It will come as a surprise to his grace. But he
believes his theory.

I believe, O Lord, help my unbelief. That is, help me to believe or help
me to unbelieve? Who helps to believe? _Egomen._ Who to unbelieve? Other
chap.

--You are the only contributor to _Dana_ who asks for pieces of silver.
Then I don't know about the next number. Fred Ryan wants space for an
article on economics.

Fraidrine. Two pieces of silver he lent me. Tide you over. Economics.

--For a guinea, Stephen said, you can publish this interview.

Buck Mulligan stood up from his laughing scribbling, laughing: and then
gravely said, honeying malice:

--I called upon the bard Kinch at his summer residence in upper
Mecklenburgh street and found him deep in the study of the _Summa contra
Gentiles_ in the company of two gonorrheal ladies, Fresh Nelly and
Rosalie, the coalquay whore.

He broke away.

--Come, Kinch. Come, wandering Aengus of the birds.

Come, Kinch. You have eaten all we left. Ay. I will serve you your orts
and offals.

Stephen rose.

Life is many days. This will end.

--We shall see you tonight, John Eglinton said. _Notre ami_ Moore says
Malachi Mulligan must be there.

Buck Mulligan flaunted his slip and panama.

--Monsieur Moore, he said, lecturer on French letters to the youth of
Ireland. I'll be there. Come, Kinch, the bards must drink. Can you walk
straight?

Laughing, he...

Swill till eleven. Irish nights entertainment.

Lubber...

Stephen followed a lubber...

One day in the national library we had a discussion. Shakes. After. His
lub back: I followed. I gall his kibe.

Stephen, greeting, then all amort, followed a lubber jester, a wellkempt
head, newbarbered, out of the vaulted cell into a shattering daylight of
no thought.

What have I learned? Of them? Of me?

Walk like Haines now.

The constant readers' room. In the readers' book Cashel Boyle O'Connor
Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell parafes his polysyllables. Item: was Hamlet
mad? The quaker's pate godlily with a priesteen in booktalk.

--O please do, sir... I shall be most pleased...

Amused Buck Mulligan mused in pleasant murmur with himself, selfnodding:

--A pleased bottom.

The turnstile.

Is that?... Blueribboned hat... Idly writing... What? Looked?...

The curving balustrade: smoothsliding Mincius.

Puck Mulligan, panamahelmeted, went step by step, iambing, trolling:

_John Eglinton, my jo, John, Why won't you wed a wife?_

He spluttered to the air:

--O, the chinless Chinaman! Chin Chon Eg Lin Ton. We went over to their
playbox, Haines and I, the plumbers' hall. Our players are creating a
new art for Europe like the Greeks or M. Maeterlinck. Abbey Theatre! I
smell the pubic sweat of monks.

He spat blank.

Forgot: any more than he forgot the whipping lousy Lucy gave him. And
left the _femme de trente ans._ And why no other children born? And his
first child a girl?

Afterwit. Go back.

The dour recluse still there (he has his cake) and the douce youngling,
minion of pleasure, Phedo's toyable fair hair.

Eh... I just eh... wanted... I forgot... he...

--Longworth and M'Curdy Atkinson were there...

Puck Mulligan footed featly, trilling:

     _I hardly hear the purlieu cry
     Or a tommy talk as I pass one by
     Before my thoughts begin to run
     On F. M'Curdy Atkinson,
     The same that had the wooden leg
     And that filibustering filibeg
     That never dared to slake his drouth,
     Magee that had the chinless mouth.
     Being afraid to marry on earth
     They masturbated for all they were worth._


Jest on. Know thyself.

Halted, below me, a quizzer looks at me. I halt.

--Mournful mummer, Buck Mulligan moaned. Synge has left off wearing
black to be like nature. Only crows, priests and English coal are black.

A laugh tripped over his lips.

--Longworth is awfully sick, he said, after what you wrote about that
old hake Gregory. O you inquisitional drunken jewjesuit! She gets you
a job on the paper and then you go and slate her drivel to Jaysus.
Couldn't you do the Yeats touch?

He went on and down, mopping, chanting with waving graceful arms:

--The most beautiful book that has come out of our country in my time.
One thinks of Homer.

He stopped at the stairfoot.

--I have conceived a play for the mummers, he said solemnly.

The pillared Moorish hall, shadows entwined. Gone the nine men's morrice
with caps of indices.

In sweetly varying voices Buck Mulligan read his tablet: _Everyman His
own Wife or A Honeymoon in the Hand (a national immorality in three
orgasms) by Ballocky Mulligan._


He turned a happy patch's smirk to Stephen, saying:

--The disguise, I fear, is thin. But listen.

He read, _marcato:_

--Characters:

     TODY TOSTOFF (a ruined Pole)
     CRAB (a bushranger)
     MEDICAL DICK )
     and          ) (two birds with one stone)
     MEDICAL DAVY )
     MOTHER GROGAN (a watercarrier)
     FRESH NELLY
     and
     ROSALIE (the coalquay whore).

He laughed, lolling a to and fro head, walking on, followed by Stephen:
and mirthfully he told the shadows, souls of men:

--O, the night in the Camden hall when the daughters of Erin had to
lift their skirts to step over you as you lay in your mulberrycoloured,
multicoloured, multitudinous vomit!

--The most innocent son of Erin, Stephen said, for whom they ever lifted
them.

About to pass through the doorway, feeling one behind, he stood aside.

Part. The moment is now. Where then? If Socrates leave his house today,
if Judas go forth tonight. Why? That lies in space which I in time must
come to, ineluctably.

My will: his will that fronts me. Seas between.

A man passed out between them, bowing, greeting.

--Good day again, Buck Mulligan said.

The portico.

Here I watched the birds for augury. Aengus of the birds. They go, they
come. Last night I flew. Easily flew. Men wondered. Street of harlots
after. A creamfruit melon he held to me. In. You will see.

--The wandering jew, Buck Mulligan whispered with clown's awe. Did you
see his eye? He looked upon you to lust after you. I fear thee, ancient
mariner. O, Kinch, thou art in peril. Get thee a breechpad.

Manner of Oxenford.

Day. Wheelbarrow sun over arch of bridge.

A dark back went before them, step of a pard, down, out by the gateway,
under portcullis barbs.

They followed.

Offend me still. Speak on.

Kind air defined the coigns of houses in Kildare street. No birds. Frail
from the housetops two plumes of smoke ascended, pluming, and in a flaw
of softness softly were blown.

Cease to strive. Peace of the druid priests of Cymbeline: hierophantic:
from wide earth an altar.

     _Laud we the gods
     And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils
     From our bless'd altars._


The superior, the very reverend John Conmee S.J. reset his smooth watch
in his interior pocket as he came down the presbytery steps. Five to
three. Just nice time to walk to Artane. What was that boy's name again?
Dignam. Yes. _Vere dignum et iustum est._ Brother Swan was the person
to see. Mr Cunningham's letter. Yes. Oblige him, if possible. Good
practical catholic: useful at mission time.

A onelegged sailor, swinging himself onward by lazy jerks of his
crutches, growled some notes. He jerked short before the convent of the
sisters of charity and held out a peaked cap for alms towards the very
reverend John Conmee S. J. Father Conmee blessed him in the sun for his
purse held, he knew, one silver crown.

Father Conmee crossed to Mountjoy square. He thought, but not for long,
of soldiers and sailors, whose legs had been shot off by cannonballs,
ending their days in some pauper ward, and of cardinal Wolsey's words:
_If I had served my God as I have served my king He would not have
abandoned me in my old days._ He walked by the treeshade of sunnywinking
leaves: and towards him came the wife of Mr David Sheehy M.P.

--Very well, indeed, father. And you, father?

Father Conmee was wonderfully well indeed. He would go to Buxton
probably for the waters. And her boys, were they getting on well at
Belvedere? Was that so? Father Conmee was very glad indeed to hear that.
And Mr Sheehy himself? Still in London. The house was still sitting, to
be sure it was. Beautiful weather it was, delightful indeed. Yes, it was
very probable that Father Bernard Vaughan would come again to preach. O,
yes: a very great success. A wonderful man really.

Father Conmee was very glad to see the wife of Mr David Sheehy M.P.
Iooking so well and he begged to be remembered to Mr David Sheehy M.P.
Yes, he would certainly call.

--Good afternoon, Mrs Sheehy.

Father Conmee doffed his silk hat and smiled, as he took leave, at the
jet beads of her mantilla inkshining in the sun. And smiled yet again,
in going. He had cleaned his teeth, he knew, with arecanut paste.

Father Conmee walked and, walking, smiled for he thought on Father
Bernard Vaughan's droll eyes and cockney voice.

--Pilate! Wy don't you old back that owlin mob?

A zealous man, however. Really he was. And really did great good in his
way. Beyond a doubt. He loved Ireland, he said, and he loved the Irish.
Of good family too would one think it? Welsh, were they not?

O, lest he forget. That letter to father provincial.

Father Conmee stopped three little schoolboys at the corner of Mountjoy
square. Yes: they were from Belvedere. The little house. Aha. And were
they good boys at school? O. That was very good now. And what was his
name? Jack Sohan. And his name? Ger. Gallaher. And the other little man?
His name was Brunny Lynam. O, that was a very nice name to have.

Father Conmee gave a letter from his breast to Master Brunny Lynam and
pointed to the red pillarbox at the corner of Fitzgibbon street.

--But mind you don't post yourself into the box, little man, he said.

The boys sixeyed Father Conmee and laughed:

--O, sir.

--Well, let me see if you can post a letter, Father Conmee said.

Master Brunny Lynam ran across the road and put Father Conmee's letter
to father provincial into the mouth of the bright red letterbox. Father
Conmee smiled and nodded and smiled and walked along Mountjoy square
east.

Mr Denis J Maginni, professor of dancing &c, in silk hat, slate
frockcoat with silk facings, white kerchief tie, tight lavender
trousers, canary gloves and pointed patent boots, walking with grave
deportment most respectfully took the curbstone as he passed lady
Maxwell at the corner of Dignam's court.

Was that not Mrs M'Guinness?

Mrs M'Guinness, stately, silverhaired, bowed to Father Conmee from the
farther footpath along which she sailed. And Father Conmee smiled and
saluted. How did she do?

A fine carriage she had. Like Mary, queen of Scots, something. And to
think that she was a pawnbroker! Well, now! Such a... what should he
say?... such a queenly mien.

Father Conmee walked down Great Charles street and glanced at the shutup
free church on his left. The reverend T. R. Greene B.A. will (D.V.)
speak. The incumbent they called him. He felt it incumbent on him to say
a few words. But one should be charitable. Invincible ignorance. They
acted according to their lights.

Father Conmee turned the corner and walked along the North Circular
road. It was a wonder that there was not a tramline in such an important
thoroughfare. Surely, there ought to be.

A band of satchelled schoolboys crossed from Richmond street. All
raised untidy caps. Father Conmee greeted them more than once benignly.
Christian brother boys.

Father Conmee smelt incense on his right hand as he walked. Saint
Joseph's church, Portland row. For aged and virtuous females.
Father Conmee raised his hat to the Blessed Sacrament. Virtuous: but
occasionally they were also badtempered.

Near Aldborough house Father Conmee thought of that spendthrift
nobleman. And now it was an office or something.

Father Conmee began to walk along the North Strand road and was saluted
by Mr William Gallagher who stood in the doorway of his shop. Father
Conmee saluted Mr William Gallagher and perceived the odours that came
from baconflitches and ample cools of butter. He passed Grogan's the
Tobacconist against which newsboards leaned and told of a dreadful
catastrophe in New York. In America those things were continually
happening. Unfortunate people to die like that, unprepared. Still, an
act of perfect contrition.

Father Conmee went by Daniel Bergin's publichouse against the window of
which two unlabouring men lounged. They saluted him and were saluted.

Father Conmee passed H. J. O'Neill's funeral establishment where Corny
Kelleher totted figures in the daybook while he chewed a blade of hay.
A constable on his beat saluted Father Conmee and Father Conmee saluted
the constable. In Youkstetter's, the porkbutcher's, Father Conmee
observed pig's puddings, white and black and red, lie neatly curled in
tubes.

Moored under the trees of Charleville Mall Father Conmee saw a
turfbarge, a towhorse with pendent head, a bargeman with a hat of dirty
straw seated amidships, smoking and staring at a branch of poplar above
him. It was idyllic: and Father Conmee reflected on the providence of
the Creator who had made turf to be in bogs whence men might dig it
out and bring it to town and hamlet to make fires in the houses of poor
people.

On Newcomen bridge the very reverend John Conmee S.J. of saint Francis
Xavier's church, upper Gardiner street, stepped on to an outward bound
tram.

Off an inward bound tram stepped the reverend Nicholas Dudley C. C. of
saint Agatha's church, north William street, on to Newcomen bridge.

At Newcomen bridge Father Conmee stepped into an outward bound tram for
he disliked to traverse on foot the dingy way past Mud Island.

Father Conmee sat in a corner of the tramcar, a blue ticket tucked with
care in the eye of one plump kid glove, while four shillings, a sixpence
and five pennies chuted from his other plump glovepalm into his purse.
Passing the ivy church he reflected that the ticket inspector usually
made his visit when one had carelessly thrown away the ticket. The
solemnity of the occupants of the car seemed to Father Conmee excessive
for a journey so short and cheap. Father Conmee liked cheerful decorum.

It was a peaceful day. The gentleman with the glasses opposite Father
Conmee had finished explaining and looked down. His wife, Father Conmee
supposed. A tiny yawn opened the mouth of the wife of the gentleman with
the glasses. She raised her small gloved fist, yawned ever so gently,
tiptapping her small gloved fist on her opening mouth and smiled tinily,
sweetly.

Father Conmee perceived her perfume in the car. He perceived also that
the awkward man at the other side of her was sitting on the edge of the
seat.

Father Conmee at the altarrails placed the host with difficulty in the
mouth of the awkward old man who had the shaky head.

At Annesley bridge the tram halted and, when it was about to go, an old
woman rose suddenly from her place to alight. The conductor pulled the
bellstrap to stay the car for her. She passed out with her basket and
a marketnet: and Father Conmee saw the conductor help her and net and
basket down: and Father Conmee thought that, as she had nearly passed
the end of the penny fare, she was one of those good souls who had
always to be told twice _bless you, my child,_ that they have been
absolved, _pray for me._ But they had so many worries in life, so many
cares, poor creatures.

From the hoardings Mr Eugene Stratton grimaced with thick niggerlips at
Father Conmee.

Father Conmee thought of the souls of black and brown and yellow men and
of his sermon on saint Peter Claver S.J. and the African mission and of
the propagation of the faith and of the millions of black and brown and
yellow souls that had not received the baptism of water when their last
hour came like a thief in the night. That book by the Belgian jesuit,
_Le Nombre des Ãlus,_ seemed to Father Conmee a reasonable plea. Those
were millions of human souls created by God in His Own likeness to
whom the faith had not (D.V.) been brought. But they were God's souls,
created by God. It seemed to Father Conmee a pity that they should all
be lost, a waste, if one might say.

At the Howth road stop Father Conmee alighted, was saluted by the
conductor and saluted in his turn.

The Malahide road was quiet. It pleased Father Conmee, road and name.
The joybells were ringing in gay Malahide. Lord Talbot de Malahide,
immediate hereditary lord admiral of Malahide and the seas adjoining.
Then came the call to arms and she was maid, wife and widow in one day.
Those were old worldish days, loyal times in joyous townlands, old times
in the barony.

Father Conmee, walking, thought of his little book _Old Times in the
Barony_ and of the book that might be written about jesuit houses and of
Mary Rochfort, daughter of lord Molesworth, first countess of Belvedere.

A listless lady, no more young, walked alone the shore of lough Ennel,
Mary, first countess of Belvedere, listlessly walking in the evening,
not startled when an otter plunged. Who could know the truth? Not the
jealous lord Belvedere and not her confessor if she had not committed
adultery fully, _eiaculatio seminis inter vas naturale mulieris,_ with
her husband's brother? She would half confess if she had not all sinned
as women did. Only God knew and she and he, her husband's brother.

Father Conmee thought of that tyrannous incontinence, needed however for
man's race on earth, and of the ways of God which were not our ways.

Don John Conmee walked and moved in times of yore. He was humane and
honoured there. He bore in mind secrets confessed and he smiled at
smiling noble faces in a beeswaxed drawingroom, ceiled with full fruit
clusters. And the hands of a bride and of a bridegroom, noble to noble,
were impalmed by Don John Conmee.

It was a charming day.

The lychgate of a field showed Father Conmee breadths of cabbages,
curtseying to him with ample underleaves. The sky showed him a flock of
small white clouds going slowly down the wind. _Moutonner,_ the French
said. A just and homely word.

Father Conmee, reading his office, watched a flock of muttoning clouds
over Rathcoffey. His thinsocked ankles were tickled by the stubble of
Clongowes field. He walked there, reading in the evening, and heard
the cries of the boys' lines at their play, young cries in the quiet
evening. He was their rector: his reign was mild.

Father Conmee drew off his gloves and took his rededged breviary out. An
ivory bookmark told him the page.

Nones. He should have read that before lunch. But lady Maxwell had come.

Father Conmee read in secret _Pater_ and _Ave_ and crossed his breast.
_Deus in adiutorium._

He walked calmly and read mutely the nones, walking and reading till he
came to _Res_ in _Beati immaculati: Principium verborum tuorum veritas:
in eternum omnia indicia iustitiae tuae._

A flushed young man came from a gap of a hedge and after him came a
young woman with wild nodding daisies in her hand. The young man raised
his cap abruptly: the young woman abruptly bent and with slow care
detached from her light skirt a clinging twig.

Father Conmee blessed both gravely and turned a thin page of his
breviary. _Sin: Principes persecuti sunt me gratis: et a verbis tuis
formidavit cor meum._

* * * * *

Corny Kelleher closed his long daybook and glanced with his drooping eye
at a pine coffinlid sentried in a corner. He pulled himself erect,
went to it and, spinning it on its axle, viewed its shape and brass
furnishings. Chewing his blade of hay he laid the coffinlid by and came
to the doorway. There he tilted his hatbrim to give shade to his eyes
and leaned against the doorcase, looking idly out.

Father John Conmee stepped into the Dollymount tram on Newcomen bridge.

Corny Kelleher locked his largefooted boots and gazed, his hat
downtilted, chewing his blade of hay.

Constable 57C, on his beat, stood to pass the time of day.

--That's a fine day, Mr Kelleher.

--Ay, Corny Kelleher said.

--It's very close, the constable said.

Corny Kelleher sped a silent jet of hayjuice arching from his mouth
while a generous white arm from a window in Eccles street flung forth a
coin.

--What's the best news? he asked.

--I seen that particular party last evening, the constable said with
bated breath.

* * * * *

A onelegged sailor crutched himself round MacConnell's corner, skirting
Rabaiotti's icecream car, and jerked himself up Eccles street. Towards
Larry O'Rourke, in shirtsleeves in his doorway, he growled unamiably:

--_For England_...

He swung himself violently forward past Katey and Boody Dedalus, halted
and growled:

--_home and beauty._

J. J. O'Molloy's white careworn face was told that Mr Lambert was in the
warehouse with a visitor.

A stout lady stopped, took a copper coin from her purse and dropped it
into the cap held out to her. The sailor grumbled thanks, glanced sourly
at the unheeding windows, sank his head and swung himself forward four
strides.

He halted and growled angrily:

--_For England_...

Two barefoot urchins, sucking long liquorice laces, halted near him,
gaping at his stump with their yellowslobbered mouths.

He swung himself forward in vigorous jerks, halted, lifted his head
towards a window and bayed deeply:

--_home and beauty._

The gay sweet chirping whistling within went on a bar or two, ceased.
The blind of the window was drawn aside. A card _Unfurnished Apartments_
slipped from the sash and fell. A plump bare generous arm shone, was
seen, held forth from a white petticoatbodice and taut shiftstraps. A
woman's hand flung forth a coin over the area railings. It fell on the
path.

One of the urchins ran to it, picked it up and dropped it into the
minstrel's cap, saying:

--There, sir.

* * * * *

Katey and Boody Dedalus shoved in the door of the closesteaming kitchen.

--Did you put in the books? Boody asked.

Maggy at the range rammed down a greyish mass beneath bubbling suds
twice with her potstick and wiped her brow.

--They wouldn't give anything on them, she said.

Father Conmee walked through Clongowes fields, his thinsocked ankles
tickled by stubble.

--Where did you try? Boody asked.

--M'Guinness's.

Boody stamped her foot and threw her satchel on the table.

--Bad cess to her big face! she cried.

Katey went to the range and peered with squinting eyes.

--What's in the pot? she asked.

--Shirts, Maggy said.

Boody cried angrily:

--Crickey, is there nothing for us to eat?

Katey, lifting the kettlelid in a pad of her stained skirt, asked:

--And what's in this?

A heavy fume gushed in answer.

--Peasoup, Maggy said.

--Where did you get it? Katey asked.

--Sister Mary Patrick, Maggy said.

The lacquey rang his bell.

--Barang!

Boody sat down at the table and said hungrily:

--Give us it here.

Maggy poured yellow thick soup from the kettle into a bowl. Katey,
sitting opposite Boody, said quietly, as her fingertip lifted to her
mouth random crumbs:

--A good job we have that much. Where's Dilly?

--Gone to meet father, Maggy said.

Boody, breaking big chunks of bread into the yellow soup, added:

--Our father who art not in heaven.

Maggy, pouring yellow soup in Katey's bowl, exclaimed:

--Boody! For shame!

A skiff, a crumpled throwaway, Elijah is coming, rode lightly down the
Liffey, under Loopline bridge, shooting the rapids where water chafed
around the bridgepiers, sailing eastward past hulls and anchorchains,
between the Customhouse old dock and George's quay.

* * * * *

The blond girl in Thornton's bedded the wicker basket with rustling
fibre. Blazes Boylan handed her the bottle swathed in pink tissue paper
and a small jar.

--Put these in first, will you? he said.

--Yes, sir, the blond girl said. And the fruit on top.

--That'll do, game ball, Blazes Boylan said.

She bestowed fat pears neatly, head by tail, and among them ripe
shamefaced peaches.

Blazes Boylan walked here and there in new tan shoes about the
fruitsmelling shop, lifting fruits, young juicy crinkled and plump red
tomatoes, sniffing smells.

H. E. L. Y.'S filed before him, tallwhitehatted, past Tangier lane,
plodding towards their goal.

He turned suddenly from a chip of strawberries, drew a gold watch from
his fob and held it at its chain's length.

--Can you send them by tram? Now?

A darkbacked figure under Merchants' arch scanned books on the hawker's
cart.

--Certainly, sir. Is it in the city?

--O, yes, Blazes Boylan said. Ten minutes.

The blond girl handed him a docket and pencil.

--Will you write the address, sir?

Blazes Boylan at the counter wrote and pushed the docket to her.

--Send it at once, will you? he said. It's for an invalid.

--Yes, sir. I will, sir.

Blazes Boylan rattled merry money in his trousers' pocket.

--What's the damage? he asked.

The blond girl's slim fingers reckoned the fruits.

Blazes Boylan looked into the cut of her blouse. A young pullet. He took
a red carnation from the tall stemglass.

--This for me? he asked gallantly.

The blond girl glanced sideways at him, got up regardless, with his tie
a bit crooked, blushing.

--Yes, sir, she said.

Bending archly she reckoned again fat pears and blushing peaches.

Blazes Boylan looked in her blouse with more favour, the stalk of the
red flower between his smiling teeth.

--May I say a word to your telephone, missy? he asked roguishly.

* * * * *

_--Ma!_ Almidano Artifoni said.

He gazed over Stephen's shoulder at Goldsmith's knobby poll.

Two carfuls of tourists passed slowly, their women sitting fore,
gripping the handrests. Palefaces. Men's arms frankly round their
stunted forms. They looked from Trinity to the blind columned porch of
the bank of Ireland where pigeons roocoocooed.

--_Anch'io ho avuto di queste idee, ALMIDANO ARTIFONI SAID, quand' ero
giovine come Lei. Eppoi mi sono convinto che il mondo Ã¨ una bestia.
Ã peccato. PerchÃ¨ la sua voce... sarebbe un cespite di rendita, via.
Invece, Lei si sacrifica._

--_Sacrifizio incruento,_ Stephen said smiling, swaying his ashplant in
slow swingswong from its midpoint, lightly.

_--Speriamo,_ the round mustachioed face said pleasantly. _Ma, dia retta
a me. Ci rifletta_.

By the stern stone hand of Grattan, bidding halt, an Inchicore tram
unloaded straggling Highland soldiers of a band.

--_Ci rifletterÃ²,_ Stephen said, glancing down the solid trouserleg.

--_Ma, sul serio, eh?_ Almidano Artifoni said.

His heavy hand took Stephen's firmly. Human eyes. They gazed curiously
an instant and turned quickly towards a Dalkey tram.

_--Eccolo,_ Almidano Artifoni said in friendly haste. _Venga a trovarmi
e ci pensi. Addio, caro._

--_Arrivederla, maestro,_ Stephen said, raising his hat when his hand
was freed. _E grazie._

--_Di che?_ Almidano Artifoni said. _Scusi, eh? Tante belle cose!_

Almidano Artifoni, holding up a baton of rolled music as a signal,
trotted on stout trousers after the Dalkey tram. In vain he trotted,
signalling in vain among the rout of barekneed gillies smuggling
implements of music through Trinity gates.

* * * * *

Miss Dunne hid the Capel street library copy of _The Woman in White_
far back in her drawer and rolled a sheet of gaudy notepaper into her
typewriter.

Too much mystery business in it. Is he in love with that one, Marion?
Change it and get another by Mary Cecil Haye.

The disk shot down the groove, wobbled a while, ceased and ogled them:
six.

Miss Dunne clicked on the keyboard:

--16 June 1904.

Five tallwhitehatted sandwichmen between Monypeny's corner and the slab
where Wolfe Tone's statue was not, eeled themselves turning H. E. L.
Y.'S and plodded back as they had come.

Then she stared at the large poster of Marie Kendall, charming
soubrette, and, listlessly lolling, scribbled on the jotter sixteens and
capital esses. Mustard hair and dauby cheeks. She's not nicelooking,
is she? The way she's holding up her bit of a skirt. Wonder will that
fellow be at the band tonight. If I could get that dressmaker to make a
concertina skirt like Susy Nagle's. They kick out grand. Shannon and
all the boatclub swells never took his eyes off her. Hope to goodness he
won't keep me here till seven.

The telephone rang rudely by her ear.

--Hello. Yes, sir. No, sir. Yes, sir. I'll ring them up after five. Only
those two, sir, for Belfast and Liverpool. All right, sir. Then I can go
after six if you're not back. A quarter after. Yes, sir. Twentyseven and
six. I'll tell him. Yes: one, seven, six.

She scribbled three figures on an envelope.

--Mr Boylan! Hello! That gentleman from SPORT was in looking for you. Mr
Lenehan, yes. He said he'll be in the Ormond at four. No, sir. Yes, sir.
I'll ring them up after five.

* * * * *

Two pink faces turned in the flare of the tiny torch.

--Who's that? Ned Lambert asked. Is that Crotty?

--Ringabella and Crosshaven, a voice replied groping for foothold.

--Hello, Jack, is that yourself? Ned Lambert said, raising in salute his
pliant lath among the flickering arches. Come on. Mind your steps there.

The vesta in the clergyman's uplifted hand consumed itself in a long
soft flame and was let fall. At their feet its red speck died: and
mouldy air closed round them.

--How interesting! a refined accent said in the gloom.

--Yes, sir, Ned Lambert said heartily. We are standing in the historic
council chamber of saint Mary's abbey where silken Thomas proclaimed
himself a rebel in 1534. This is the most historic spot in all Dublin.
O'Madden Burke is going to write something about it one of these days.
The old bank of Ireland was over the way till the time of the union and
the original jews' temple was here too before they built their synagogue
over in Adelaide road. You were never here before, Jack, were you?

--No, Ned.

--He rode down through Dame walk, the refined accent said, if my memory
serves me. The mansion of the Kildares was in Thomas court.

--That's right, Ned Lambert said. That's quite right, sir.

--If you will be so kind then, the clergyman said, the next time to
allow me perhaps...

--Certainly, Ned Lambert said. Bring the camera whenever you like. I'll
get those bags cleared away from the windows. You can take it from here
or from here.

In the still faint light he moved about, tapping with his lath the piled
seedbags and points of vantage on the floor.

From a long face a beard and gaze hung on a chessboard.

--I'm deeply obliged, Mr Lambert, the clergyman said. I won't trespass
on your valuable time...

--You're welcome, sir, Ned Lambert said. Drop in whenever you like. Next
week, say. Can you see?

--Yes, yes. Good afternoon, Mr Lambert. Very pleased to have met you.

--Pleasure is mine, sir, Ned Lambert answered.

He followed his guest to the outlet and then whirled his lath away among
the pillars. With J. J. O'Molloy he came forth slowly into Mary's abbey
where draymen were loading floats with sacks of carob and palmnut meal,
O'Connor, Wexford.

He stood to read the card in his hand.

--The reverend Hugh C. Love, Rathcoffey. Present address: Saint
Michael's, Sallins. Nice young chap he is. He's writing a book about the
Fitzgeralds he told me. He's well up in history, faith.

The young woman with slow care detached from her light skirt a clinging
twig.

--I thought you were at a new gunpowder plot, J. J. O'Molloy said.

Ned Lambert cracked his fingers in the air.

--God! he cried. I forgot to tell him that one about the earl of Kildare
after he set fire to Cashel cathedral. You know that one? _I'm bloody
sorry I did it,_ says he, _but I declare to God I thought the archbishop
was inside._ He mightn't like it, though. What? God, I'll tell him
anyhow. That was the great earl, the Fitzgerald Mor. Hot members they
were all of them, the Geraldines.

The horses he passed started nervously under their slack harness. He
slapped a piebald haunch quivering near him and cried:

--Woa, sonny!

He turned to J. J. O'Molloy and asked:

--Well, Jack. What is it? What's the trouble? Wait awhile. Hold hard.

With gaping mouth and head far back he stood still and, after an
instant, sneezed loudly.

--Chow! he said. Blast you!

--The dust from those sacks, J. J. O'Molloy said politely.

--No, Ned Lambert gasped, I caught a... cold night before... blast
your soul... night before last... and there was a hell of a lot of
draught...

He held his handkerchief ready for the coming...

--I was... Glasnevin this morning... poor little... what do you call
him... Chow!... Mother of Moses!

* * * * *

Tom Rochford took the top disk from the pile he clasped against his
claret waistcoat.

--See? he said. Say it's turn six. In here, see. Turn Now On.

He slid it into the left slot for them. It shot down the groove, wobbled
a while, ceased, ogling them: six.

Lawyers of the past, haughty, pleading, beheld pass from the
consolidated taxing office to Nisi Prius court Richie Goulding carrying
the costbag of Goulding, Collis and Ward and heard rustling from the
admiralty division of king's bench to the court of appeal an elderly
female with false teeth smiling incredulously and a black silk skirt of
great amplitude.

--See? he said. See now the last one I put in is over here: Turns Over.
The impact. Leverage, see?

He showed them the rising column of disks on the right.

--Smart idea, Nosey Flynn said, snuffling. So a fellow coming in late
can see what turn is on and what turns are over.

--See? Tom Rochford said.

He slid in a disk for himself: and watched it shoot, wobble, ogle, stop:
four. Turn Now On.

--I'll see him now in the Ormond, Lenehan said, and sound him. One good
turn deserves another.

--Do, Tom Rochford said. Tell him I'm Boylan with impatience.

--Goodnight, M'Coy said abruptly. When you two begin

Nosey Flynn stooped towards the lever, snuffling at it.

--But how does it work here, Tommy? he asked.

--Tooraloo, Lenehan said. See you later.

He followed M'Coy out across the tiny square of Crampton court.

--He's a hero, he said simply.

--I know, M'Coy said. The drain, you mean.

--Drain? Lenehan said. It was down a manhole.

They passed Dan Lowry's musichall where Marie Kendall, charming
soubrette, smiled on them from a poster a dauby smile.

Going down the path of Sycamore street beside the Empire musichall
Lenehan showed M'Coy how the whole thing was. One of those manholes like
a bloody gaspipe and there was the poor devil stuck down in it, half
choked with sewer gas. Down went Tom Rochford anyhow, booky's vest and
all, with the rope round him. And be damned but he got the rope round
the poor devil and the two were hauled up.

--The act of a hero, he said.

At the Dolphin they halted to allow the ambulance car to gallop past
them for Jervis street.

--This way, he said, walking to the right. I want to pop into Lynam's
to see Sceptre's starting price. What's the time by your gold watch and
chain?

M'Coy peered into Marcus Tertius Moses' sombre office, then at O'Neill's
clock.

--After three, he said. Who's riding her?

--O. Madden, Lenehan said. And a game filly she is.

While he waited in Temple bar M'Coy dodged a banana peel with gentle
pushes of his toe from the path to the gutter. Fellow might damn easy
get a nasty fall there coming along tight in the dark.

The gates of the drive opened wide to give egress to the viceregal
cavalcade.

--Even money, Lenehan said returning. I knocked against Bantam Lyons
in there going to back a bloody horse someone gave him that hasn't an
earthly. Through here.

They went up the steps and under Merchants' arch. A darkbacked figure
scanned books on the hawker's cart.

--There he is, Lenehan said.

--Wonder what he's buying, M'Coy said, glancing behind.

--_Leopoldo or the Bloom is on the Rye,_ Lenehan said.

--He's dead nuts on sales, M'Coy said. I was with him one day and he
bought a book from an old one in Liffey street for two bob. There were
fine plates in it worth double the money, the stars and the moon and
comets with long tails. Astronomy it was about.

Lenehan laughed.

--I'll tell you a damn good one about comets' tails, he said. Come over
in the sun.

They crossed to the metal bridge and went along Wellington quay by the
riverwall.

Master Patrick Aloysius Dignam came out of Mangan's, late Fehrenbach's,
carrying a pound and a half of porksteaks.

--There was a long spread out at Glencree reformatory, Lenehan said
eagerly. The annual dinner, you know. Boiled shirt affair. The lord
mayor was there, Val Dillon it was, and sir Charles Cameron and Dan
Dawson spoke and there was music. Bartell d'Arcy sang and Benjamin
Dollard...

--I know, M'Coy broke in. My missus sang there once.

--Did she? Lenehan said.

A card _Unfurnished Apartments_ reappeared on the windowsash of number 7
Eccles street.

He checked his tale a moment but broke out in a wheezy laugh.

--But wait till I tell you, he said. Delahunt of Camden street had the
catering and yours truly was chief bottlewasher. Bloom and the wife were
there. Lashings of stuff we put up: port wine and sherry and curacao to
which we did ample justice. Fast and furious it was. After liquids came
solids. Cold joints galore and mince pies...

--I know, M'Coy said. The year the missus was there...

Lenehan linked his arm warmly.

--But wait till I tell you, he said. We had a midnight lunch too after
all the jollification and when we sallied forth it was blue o'clock the
morning after the night before. Coming home it was a gorgeous winter's
night on the Featherbed Mountain. Bloom and Chris Callinan were on one
side of the car and I was with the wife on the other. We started singing
glees and duets: _Lo, the early beam of morning_. She was well primed
with a good load of Delahunt's port under her bellyband. Every jolt the
bloody car gave I had her bumping up against me. Hell's delights! She
has a fine pair, God bless her. Like that.

He held his caved hands a cubit from him, frowning:

--I was tucking the rug under her and settling her boa all the time.
Know what I mean?

His hands moulded ample curves of air. He shut his eyes tight in
delight, his body shrinking, and blew a sweet chirp from his lips.

--The lad stood to attention anyhow, he said with a sigh. She's a gamey
mare and no mistake. Bloom was pointing out all the stars and the comets
in the heavens to Chris Callinan and the jarvey: the great bear and
Hercules and the dragon, and the whole jingbang lot. But, by God, I was
lost, so to speak, in the milky way. He knows them all, faith. At last
she spotted a weeny weeshy one miles away. _And what star is that,
Poldy?_ says she. By God, she had Bloom cornered. _That one, is it?_
says Chris Callinan, _sure that's only what you might call a pinprick._
By God, he wasn't far wide of the mark.

Lenehan stopped and leaned on the riverwall, panting with soft laughter.

--I'm weak, he gasped.

M'Coy's white face smiled about it at instants and grew grave. Lenehan
walked on again. He lifted his yachtingcap and scratched his hindhead
rapidly. He glanced sideways in the sunlight at M'Coy.

--He's a cultured allroundman, Bloom is, he said seriously. He's not one
of your common or garden... you know... There's a touch of the artist
about old Bloom.

* * * * *

Mr Bloom turned over idly pages of _The Awful Disclosures of Maria
Monk,_ then of Aristotle's _Masterpiece._ Crooked botched print. Plates:
infants cuddled in a ball in bloodred wombs like livers of slaughtered
cows. Lots of them like that at this moment all over the world. All
butting with their skulls to get out of it. Child born every minute
somewhere. Mrs Purefoy.

He laid both books aside and glanced at the third: _Tales of the Ghetto_
by Leopold von Sacher Masoch.

--That I had, he said, pushing it by.

The shopman let two volumes fall on the counter.

--Them are two good ones, he said.

Onions of his breath came across the counter out of his ruined mouth.
He bent to make a bundle of the other books, hugged them against his
unbuttoned waistcoat and bore them off behind the dingy curtain.

On O'Connell bridge many persons observed the grave deportment and gay
apparel of Mr Denis J Maginni, professor of dancing &c.

Mr Bloom, alone, looked at the titles. _Fair Tyrants_ by James
Lovebirch. Know the kind that is. Had it? Yes.

He opened it. Thought so.

A woman's voice behind the dingy curtain. Listen: the man.

No: she wouldn't like that much. Got her it once.

He read the other title: _Sweets of Sin_. More in her line. Let us see.

He read where his finger opened.

_--All the dollarbills her husband gave her were spent in the stores on
wondrous gowns and costliest frillies. For him! For raoul!_

Yes. This. Here. Try.

--_Her mouth glued on his in a luscious voluptuous kiss while his hands
felt for the opulent curves inside her deshabillÃ©._

Yes. Take this. The end.

--_You are late, he spoke hoarsely, eying her with a suspicious glare.
The beautiful woman threw off her sabletrimmed wrap, displaying her
queenly shoulders and heaving embonpoint. An imperceptible smile played
round her perfect lips as she turned to him calmly._

Mr Bloom read again: _The beautiful woman._

Warmth showered gently over him, cowing his flesh. Flesh yielded amply
amid rumpled clothes: whites of eyes swooning up. His nostrils arched
themselves for prey. Melting breast ointments (_for Him! For Raoul!_).
Armpits' oniony sweat. Fishgluey slime (_her heaving embonpoint!_).
Feel! Press! Crushed! Sulphur dung of lions!

Young! Young!

An elderly female, no more young, left the building of the courts of
chancery, king's bench, exchequer and common pleas, having heard in
the lord chancellor's court the case in lunacy of Potterton, in the
admiralty division the summons, exparte motion, of the owners of the
Lady Cairns versus the owners of the barque Mona, in the court of appeal
reservation of judgment in the case of Harvey versus the Ocean Accident
and Guarantee Corporation.

Phlegmy coughs shook the air of the bookshop, bulging out the dingy
curtains. The shopman's uncombed grey head came out and his unshaven
reddened face, coughing. He raked his throat rudely, puked phlegm on the
floor. He put his boot on what he had spat, wiping his sole along it,
and bent, showing a rawskinned crown, scantily haired.

Mr Bloom beheld it.

Mastering his troubled breath, he said:

--I'll take this one.

The shopman lifted eyes bleared with old rheum.

--_Sweets of Sin,_ he said, tapping on it. That's a good one.

* * * * *

The lacquey by the door of Dillon's auctionrooms shook his handbell
twice again and viewed himself in the chalked mirror of the cabinet.

Dilly Dedalus, loitering by the curbstone, heard the beats of the
bell, the cries of the auctioneer within. Four and nine. Those lovely
curtains. Five shillings. Cosy curtains. Selling new at two guineas. Any
advance on five shillings? Going for five shillings.

The lacquey lifted his handbell and shook it:

--Barang!

Bang of the lastlap bell spurred the halfmile wheelmen to their sprint.
J. A. Jackson, W. E. Wylie, A. Munro and H. T. Gahan, their stretched
necks wagging, negotiated the curve by the College library.

Mr Dedalus, tugging a long moustache, came round from Williams's row. He
halted near his daughter.

--It's time for you, she said.

--Stand up straight for the love of the lord Jesus, Mr Dedalus said.
Are you trying to imitate your uncle John, the cornetplayer, head upon
shoulder? Melancholy God!

Dilly shrugged her shoulders. Mr Dedalus placed his hands on them and
held them back.

--Stand up straight, girl, he said. You'll get curvature of the spine.
Do you know what you look like?

He let his head sink suddenly down and forward, hunching his shoulders
and dropping his underjaw.

--Give it up, father, Dilly said. All the people are looking at you.

Mr Dedalus drew himself upright and tugged again at his moustache.

--Did you get any money? Dilly asked.

--Where would I get money? Mr Dedalus said. There is no-one in Dublin
would lend me fourpence.

--You got some, Dilly said, looking in his eyes.

--How do you know that? Mr Dedalus asked, his tongue in his cheek.

Mr Kernan, pleased with the order he had booked, walked boldly along
James's street.

--I know you did, Dilly answered. Were you in the Scotch house now?

--I was not, then, Mr Dedalus said, smiling. Was it the little nuns
taught you to be so saucy? Here.

He handed her a shilling.

--See if you can do anything with that, he said.

--I suppose you got five, Dilly said. Give me more than that.

--Wait awhile, Mr Dedalus said threateningly. You're like the rest of
them, are you? An insolent pack of little bitches since your poor mother
died. But wait awhile. You'll all get a short shrift and a long day from
me. Low blackguardism! I'm going to get rid of you. Wouldn't care if I
was stretched out stiff. He's dead. The man upstairs is dead.

He left her and walked on. Dilly followed quickly and pulled his coat.

--Well, what is it? he said, stopping.

The lacquey rang his bell behind their backs.

--Barang!

--Curse your bloody blatant soul, Mr Dedalus cried, turning on him.

The lacquey, aware of comment, shook the lolling clapper of his bell but
feebly:

--Bang!

Mr Dedalus stared at him.

--Watch him, he said. It's instructive. I wonder will he allow us to
talk.

--You got more than that, father, Dilly said.

--I'm going to show you a little trick, Mr Dedalus said. I'll leave
you all where Jesus left the jews. Look, there's all I have. I got
two shillings from Jack Power and I spent twopence for a shave for the
funeral.

He drew forth a handful of copper coins, nervously.

--Can't you look for some money somewhere? Dilly said.

Mr Dedalus thought and nodded.

--I will, he said gravely. I looked all along the gutter in O'Connell
street. I'll try this one now.

--You're very funny, Dilly said, grinning.

--Here, Mr Dedalus said, handing her two pennies. Get a glass of milk
for yourself and a bun or a something. I'll be home shortly.

He put the other coins in his pocket and started to walk on.

The viceregal cavalcade passed, greeted by obsequious policemen, out of
Parkgate.

--I'm sure you have another shilling, Dilly said.

The lacquey banged loudly.

Mr Dedalus amid the din walked off, murmuring to himself with a pursing
mincing mouth gently:

--The little nuns! Nice little things! O, sure they wouldn't do
anything! O, sure they wouldn't really! Is it little sister Monica!

* * * * *

From the sundial towards James's gate walked Mr Kernan, pleased with the
order he had booked for Pulbrook Robertson, boldly along James's street,
past Shackleton's offices. Got round him all right. How do you do, Mr
Crimmins? First rate, sir. I was afraid you might be up in your other
establishment in Pimlico. How are things going? Just keeping alive.
Lovely weather we're having. Yes, indeed. Good for the country. Those
farmers are always grumbling. I'll just take a thimbleful of your best
gin, Mr Crimmins. A small gin, sir. Yes, sir. Terrible affair that
General Slocum explosion. Terrible, terrible! A thousand casualties. And
heartrending scenes. Men trampling down women and children. Most brutal
thing. What do they say was the cause? Spontaneous combustion. Most
scandalous revelation. Not a single lifeboat would float and the
firehose all burst. What I can't understand is how the inspectors ever
allowed a boat like that... Now, you're talking straight, Mr Crimmins.
You know why? Palm oil. Is that a fact? Without a doubt. Well now, look
at that. And America they say is the land of the free. I thought we were
bad here.

I smiled at him. _America,_ I said quietly, just like that. _What is
it? The sweepings of every country including our own. Isn't that true?_
That's a fact.

Graft, my dear sir. Well, of course, where there's money going there's
always someone to pick it up.

Saw him looking at my frockcoat. Dress does it. Nothing like a dressy
appearance. Bowls them over.

--Hello, Simon, Father Cowley said. How are things?

--Hello, Bob, old man, Mr Dedalus answered, stopping.

Mr Kernan halted and preened himself before the sloping mirror of Peter
Kennedy, hairdresser. Stylish coat, beyond a doubt. Scott of Dawson
street. Well worth the half sovereign I gave Neary for it. Never built
under three guineas. Fits me down to the ground. Some Kildare street
club toff had it probably. John Mulligan, the manager of the Hibernian
bank, gave me a very sharp eye yesterday on Carlisle bridge as if he
remembered me.

Aham! Must dress the character for those fellows. Knight of the road.
Gentleman. And now, Mr Crimmins, may we have the honour of your custom
again, sir. The cup that cheers but not inebriates, as the old saying
has it.

North wall and sir John Rogerson's quay, with hulls and anchorchains,
sailing westward, sailed by a skiff, a crumpled throwaway, rocked on the
ferrywash, Elijah is coming.

Mr Kernan glanced in farewell at his image. High colour, of course.
Grizzled moustache. Returned Indian officer. Bravely he bore his stumpy
body forward on spatted feet, squaring his shoulders. Is that Ned
Lambert's brother over the way, Sam? What? Yes. He's as like it as damn
it. No. The windscreen of that motorcar in the sun there. Just a flash
like that. Damn like him.

Aham! Hot spirit of juniper juice warmed his vitals and his breath. Good
drop of gin, that was. His frocktails winked in bright sunshine to his
fat strut.

Down there Emmet was hanged, drawn and quartered. Greasy black rope.
Dogs licking the blood off the street when the lord lieutenant's wife
drove by in her noddy.

Bad times those were. Well, well. Over and done with. Great topers too.
Fourbottle men.

Let me see. Is he buried in saint Michan's? Or no, there was a midnight
burial in Glasnevin. Corpse brought in through a secret door in the
wall. Dignam is there now. Went out in a puff. Well, well. Better turn
down here. Make a detour.

Mr Kernan turned and walked down the slope of Watling street by
the corner of Guinness's visitors' waitingroom. Outside the Dublin
Distillers Company's stores an outside car without fare or jarvey stood,
the reins knotted to the wheel. Damn dangerous thing. Some Tipperary
bosthoon endangering the lives of the citizens. Runaway horse.

Denis Breen with his tomes, weary of having waited an hour in John
Henry Menton's office, led his wife over O'Connell bridge, bound for the
office of Messrs Collis and Ward.

Mr Kernan approached Island street.

Times of the troubles. Must ask Ned Lambert to lend me those
reminiscences of sir Jonah Barrington. When you look back on it all
now in a kind of retrospective arrangement. Gaming at Daly's. No
cardsharping then. One of those fellows got his hand nailed to the table
by a dagger. Somewhere here lord Edward Fitzgerald escaped from major
Sirr. Stables behind Moira house.

Damn good gin that was.

Fine dashing young nobleman. Good stock, of course. That ruffian, that
sham squire, with his violet gloves gave him away. Course they were
on the wrong side. They rose in dark and evil days. Fine poem that
is: Ingram. They were gentlemen. Ben Dollard does sing that ballad
touchingly. Masterly rendition.

_At the siege of Ross did my father fall._

A cavalcade in easy trot along Pembroke quay passed, outriders leaping,
leaping in their, in their saddles. Frockcoats. Cream sunshades.

Mr Kernan hurried forward, blowing pursily.

His Excellency! Too bad! Just missed that by a hair. Damn it! What a
pity!

* * * * *

Stephen Dedalus watched through the webbed window the lapidary's fingers
prove a timedulled chain. Dust webbed the window and the showtrays. Dust
darkened the toiling fingers with their vulture nails. Dust slept
on dull coils of bronze and silver, lozenges of cinnabar, on rubies,
leprous and winedark stones.

Born all in the dark wormy earth, cold specks of fire, evil, lights
shining in the darkness. Where fallen archangels flung the stars of
their brows. Muddy swinesnouts, hands, root and root, gripe and wrest
them.

She dances in a foul gloom where gum bums with garlic. A sailorman,
rustbearded, sips from a beaker rum and eyes her. A long and seafed
silent rut. She dances, capers, wagging her sowish haunches and her
hips, on her gross belly flapping a ruby egg.

Old Russell with a smeared shammy rag burnished again his gem, turned it
and held it at the point of his Moses' beard. Grandfather ape gloating
on a stolen hoard.

And you who wrest old images from the burial earth? The brainsick words
of sophists: Antisthenes. A lore of drugs. Orient and immortal wheat
standing from everlasting to everlasting.

Two old women fresh from their whiff of the briny trudged through
Irishtown along London bridge road, one with a sanded tired umbrella,
one with a midwife's bag in which eleven cockles rolled.

The whirr of flapping leathern bands and hum of dynamos from the
powerhouse urged Stephen to be on. Beingless beings. Stop! Throb always
without you and the throb always within. Your heart you sing of. I
between them. Where? Between two roaring worlds where they swirl, I.
Shatter them, one and both. But stun myself too in the blow. Shatter me
you who can. Bawd and butcher were the words. I say! Not yet awhile. A
look around.

Yes, quite true. Very large and wonderful and keeps famous time. You say
right, sir. A Monday morning, 'twas so, indeed.

Stephen went down Bedford row, the handle of the ash clacking against
his shoulderblade. In Clohissey's window a faded 1860 print of Heenan
boxing Sayers held his eye. Staring backers with square hats stood
round the roped prizering. The heavyweights in tight loincloths proposed
gently each to other his bulbous fists. And they are throbbing: heroes'
hearts.

He turned and halted by the slanted bookcart.

--Twopence each, the huckster said. Four for sixpence.

Tattered pages. _The Irish Beekeeper. Life and Miracles of the CurÃ© of
Ars. Pocket Guide to Killarney._

I might find here one of my pawned schoolprizes. _Stephano Dedalo,
alumno optimo, palmam ferenti._

Father Conmee, having read his little hours, walked through the hamlet
of Donnycarney, murmuring vespers.

Binding too good probably. What is this? Eighth and ninth book of Moses.
Secret of all secrets. Seal of King David. Thumbed pages: read and read.
Who has passed here before me? How to soften chapped hands. Recipe for
white wine vinegar. How to win a woman's love. For me this. Say the
following talisman three times with hands folded:

--_Se el yilo nebrakada femininum! Amor me solo! Sanktus! Amen._

Who wrote this? Charms and invocations of the most blessed abbot Peter
Salanka to all true believers divulged. As good as any other abbot's
charms, as mumbling Joachim's. Down, baldynoddle, or we'll wool your
wool.

--What are you doing here, Stephen?

Dilly's high shoulders and shabby dress.

Shut the book quick. Don't let see.

--What are you doing? Stephen said.

A Stuart face of nonesuch Charles, lank locks falling at its sides. It
glowed as she crouched feeding the fire with broken boots. I told her
of Paris. Late lieabed under a quilt of old overcoats, fingering a
pinchbeck bracelet, Dan Kelly's token. _Nebrakada femininum._

--What have you there? Stephen asked.

--I bought it from the other cart for a penny, Dilly said, laughing
nervously. Is it any good?

My eyes they say she has. Do others see me so? Quick, far and daring.
Shadow of my mind.

He took the coverless book from her hand. Chardenal's French primer.

--What did you buy that for? he asked. To learn French?

She nodded, reddening and closing tight her lips.

Show no surprise. Quite natural.

--Here, Stephen said. It's all right. Mind Maggy doesn't pawn it on you.
I suppose all my books are gone.

--Some, Dilly said. We had to.

She is drowning. Agenbite. Save her. Agenbite. All against us. She will
drown me with her, eyes and hair. Lank coils of seaweed hair around me,
my heart, my soul. Salt green death.

We.

Agenbite of inwit. Inwit's agenbite.

Misery! Misery!

* * * * *

--Hello, Simon, Father Cowley said. How are things?

--Hello, Bob, old man, Mr Dedalus answered, stopping.

They clasped hands loudly outside Reddy and Daughter's. Father Cowley
brushed his moustache often downward with a scooping hand.

--What's the best news? Mr Dedalus said.

--Why then not much, Father Cowley said. I'm barricaded up, Simon, with
two men prowling around the house trying to effect an entrance.

--Jolly, Mr Dedalus said. Who is it?

--O, Father Cowley said. A certain gombeen man of our acquaintance.

--With a broken back, is it? Mr Dedalus asked.

--The same, Simon, Father Cowley answered. Reuben of that ilk. I'm just
waiting for Ben Dollard. He's going to say a word to long John to get
him to take those two men off. All I want is a little time.

He looked with vague hope up and down the quay, a big apple bulging in
his neck.

--I know, Mr Dedalus said, nodding. Poor old bockedy Ben! He's always
doing a good turn for someone. Hold hard!

He put on his glasses and gazed towards the metal bridge an instant.

--There he is, by God, he said, arse and pockets.

Ben Dollard's loose blue cutaway and square hat above large slops
crossed the quay in full gait from the metal bridge. He came towards
them at an amble, scratching actively behind his coattails.

As he came near Mr Dedalus greeted:

--Hold that fellow with the bad trousers.

--Hold him now, Ben Dollard said.

Mr Dedalus eyed with cold wandering scorn various points of Ben
Dollard's figure. Then, turning to Father Cowley with a nod, he muttered
sneeringly:

--That's a pretty garment, isn't it, for a summer's day?

--Why, God eternally curse your soul, Ben Dollard growled furiously, I
threw out more clothes in my time than you ever saw.

He stood beside them beaming, on them first and on his roomy clothes
from points of which Mr Dedalus flicked fluff, saying:

--They were made for a man in his health, Ben, anyhow.

--Bad luck to the jewman that made them, Ben Dollard said. Thanks be to
God he's not paid yet.

--And how is that _basso profondo_, Benjamin? Father Cowley asked.

Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell, murmuring,
glassyeyed, strode past the Kildare street club.

Ben Dollard frowned and, making suddenly a chanter's mouth, gave forth a
deep note.

--Aw! he said.

--That's the style, Mr Dedalus said, nodding to its drone.

--What about that? Ben Dollard said. Not too dusty? What?

He turned to both.

--That'll do, Father Cowley said, nodding also.

The reverend Hugh C. Love walked from the old chapterhouse of saint
Mary's abbey past James and Charles Kennedy's, rectifiers, attended by
Geraldines tall and personable, towards the Tholsel beyond the ford of
hurdles.

Ben Dollard with a heavy list towards the shopfronts led them forward,
his joyful fingers in the air.

--Come along with me to the subsheriff's office, he said. I want to
show you the new beauty Rock has for a bailiff. He's a cross between
Lobengula and Lynchehaun. He's well worth seeing, mind you. Come along.
I saw John Henry Menton casually in the Bodega just now and it will cost
me a fall if I don't... Wait awhile... We're on the right lay, Bob,
believe you me.

--For a few days tell him, Father Cowley said anxiously.

Ben Dollard halted and stared, his loud orifice open, a dangling button
of his coat wagging brightbacked from its thread as he wiped away the
heavy shraums that clogged his eyes to hear aright.

--What few days? he boomed. Hasn't your landlord distrained for rent?

--He has, Father Cowley said.

--Then our friend's writ is not worth the paper it's printed on, Ben
Dollard said. The landlord has the prior claim. I gave him all the
particulars. 29 Windsor avenue. Love is the name?

--That's right, Father Cowley said. The reverend Mr Love. He's a
minister in the country somewhere. But are you sure of that?

--You can tell Barabbas from me, Ben Dollard said, that he can put that
writ where Jacko put the nuts.

He led Father Cowley boldly forward, linked to his bulk.

--Filberts I believe they were, Mr Dedalus said, as he dropped his
glasses on his coatfront, following them.

* * * * *

--The youngster will be all right, Martin Cunningham said, as they
passed out of the Castleyard gate.

The policeman touched his forehead.

--God bless you, Martin Cunningham said, cheerily.

He signed to the waiting jarvey who chucked at the reins and set on
towards Lord Edward street.

Bronze by gold, Miss Kennedy's head by Miss Douce's head, appeared above
the crossblind of the Ormond hotel.

--Yes, Martin Cunningham said, fingering his beard. I wrote to Father
Conmee and laid the whole case before him.

--You could try our friend, Mr Power suggested backward.

--Boyd? Martin Cunningham said shortly. Touch me not.

John Wyse Nolan, lagging behind, reading the list, came after them
quickly down Cork hill.

On the steps of the City hall Councillor Nannetti, descending, hailed
Alderman Cowley and Councillor Abraham Lyon ascending.

The castle car wheeled empty into upper Exchange street.

--Look here, Martin, John Wyse Nolan said, overtaking them at the _Mail_
office. I see Bloom put his name down for five shillings.

--Quite right, Martin Cunningham said, taking the list. And put down the
five shillings too.

--Without a second word either, Mr Power said.

--Strange but true, Martin Cunningham added.

John Wyse Nolan opened wide eyes.

--I'll say there is much kindness in the jew, he quoted, elegantly.

They went down Parliament street.

--There's Jimmy Henry, Mr Power said, just heading for Kavanagh's.

--Righto, Martin Cunningham said. Here goes.

Outside _la Maison Claire_ Blazes Boylan waylaid Jack Mooney's
brother-in-law, humpy, tight, making for the liberties.

John Wyse Nolan fell back with Mr Power, while Martin Cunningham took
the elbow of a dapper little man in a shower of hail suit, who walked
uncertainly, with hasty steps past Micky Anderson's watches.

--The assistant town clerk's corns are giving him some trouble, John
Wyse Nolan told Mr Power.

They followed round the corner towards James Kavanagh's winerooms. The
empty castle car fronted them at rest in Essex gate. Martin Cunningham,
speaking always, showed often the list at which Jimmy Henry did not
glance.

--And long John Fanning is here too, John Wyse Nolan said, as large as
life.

The tall form of long John Fanning filled the doorway where he stood.

--Good day, Mr Subsheriff, Martin Cunningham said, as all halted and
greeted.

Long John Fanning made no way for them. He removed his large Henry Clay
decisively and his large fierce eyes scowled intelligently over all
their faces.

--Are the conscript fathers pursuing their peaceful deliberations? he
said with rich acrid utterance to the assistant town clerk.

Hell open to christians they were having, Jimmy Henry said pettishly,
about their damned Irish language. Where was the marshal, he wanted
to know, to keep order in the council chamber. And old Barlow the
macebearer laid up with asthma, no mace on the table, nothing in order,
no quorum even, and Hutchinson, the lord mayor, in Llandudno and little
Lorcan Sherlock doing _locum tenens_ for him. Damned Irish language,
language of our forefathers.

Long John Fanning blew a plume of smoke from his lips.

Martin Cunningham spoke by turns, twirling the peak of his beard, to the
assistant town clerk and the subsheriff, while John Wyse Nolan held his
peace.

--What Dignam was that? long John Fanning asked.

Jimmy Henry made a grimace and lifted his left foot.

--O, my corns! he said plaintively. Come upstairs for goodness' sake
till I sit down somewhere. Uff! Ooo! Mind!

Testily he made room for himself beside long John Fanning's flank and
passed in and up the stairs.

--Come on up, Martin Cunningham said to the subsheriff. I don't think
you knew him or perhaps you did, though.

With John Wyse Nolan Mr Power followed them in.

--Decent little soul he was, Mr Power said to the stalwart back of long
John Fanning ascending towards long John Fanning in the mirror.

--Rather lowsized. Dignam of Menton's office that was, Martin Cunningham
said.

Long John Fanning could not remember him.

Clatter of horsehoofs sounded from the air.

--What's that? Martin Cunningham said.

All turned where they stood. John Wyse Nolan came down again. From the
cool shadow of the doorway he saw the horses pass Parliament street,
harness and glossy pasterns in sunlight shimmering. Gaily they went past
before his cool unfriendly eyes, not quickly. In saddles of the leaders,
leaping leaders, rode outriders.

--What was it? Martin Cunningham asked, as they went on up the
staircase.

--The lord lieutenantgeneral and general governor of Ireland, John Wyse
Nolan answered from the stairfoot.

* * * * *

As they trod across the thick carpet Buck Mulligan whispered behind his
Panama to Haines:

--Parnell's brother. There in the corner.

They chose a small table near the window, opposite a longfaced man whose
beard and gaze hung intently down on a chessboard.

--Is that he? Haines asked, twisting round in his seat.

--Yes, Mulligan said. That's John Howard, his brother, our city marshal.

John Howard Parnell translated a white bishop quietly and his grey claw
went up again to his forehead whereat it rested. An instant after, under
its screen, his eyes looked quickly, ghostbright, at his foe and fell
once more upon a working corner.

--I'll take a _mÃ©lange,_ Haines said to the waitress.

--Two _mÃ©langes,_ Buck Mulligan said. And bring us some scones and
butter and some cakes as well.

When she had gone he said, laughing:

--We call it D.B.C. because they have damn bad cakes. O, but you missed
Dedalus on _Hamlet._

Haines opened his newbought book.

--I'm sorry, he said. Shakespeare is the happy huntingground of all
minds that have lost their balance.

The onelegged sailor growled at the area of 14 Nelson street:

--_England expects_...

Buck Mulligan's primrose waistcoat shook gaily to his laughter.

--You should see him, he said, when his body loses its balance.
Wandering Aengus I call him.

--I am sure he has an _idÃ©e fixe,_ Haines said, pinching his chin
thoughtfully with thumb and forefinger. Now I am speculating what it
would be likely to be. Such persons always have.

Buck Mulligan bent across the table gravely.

--They drove his wits astray, he said, by visions of hell. He will never
capture the Attic note. The note of Swinburne, of all poets, the white
death and the ruddy birth. That is his tragedy. He can never be a poet.
The joy of creation...

--Eternal punishment, Haines said, nodding curtly. I see. I tackled him
this morning on belief. There was something on his mind, I saw.
It's rather interesting because professor Pokorny of Vienna makes an
interesting point out of that.

Buck Mulligan's watchful eyes saw the waitress come. He helped her to
unload her tray.

--He can find no trace of hell in ancient Irish myth, Haines said, amid
the cheerful cups. The moral idea seems lacking, the sense of destiny,
of retribution. Rather strange he should have just that fixed idea. Does
he write anything for your movement?

He sank two lumps of sugar deftly longwise through the whipped cream.
Buck Mulligan slit a steaming scone in two and plastered butter over its
smoking pith. He bit off a soft piece hungrily.

--Ten years, he said, chewing and laughing. He is going to write
something in ten years.

--Seems a long way off, Haines said, thoughtfully lifting his spoon.
Still, I shouldn't wonder if he did after all.

He tasted a spoonful from the creamy cone of his cup.

--This is real Irish cream I take it, he said with forbearance. I don't
want to be imposed on.

Elijah, skiff, light crumpled throwaway, sailed eastward by flanks of
ships and trawlers, amid an archipelago of corks, beyond new Wapping
street past Benson's ferry, and by the threemasted schooner _Rosevean_
from Bridgwater with bricks.

* * * * *

Almidano Artifoni walked past Holles street, past Sewell's yard.
Behind him Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell, with
stickumbrelladustcoat dangling, shunned the lamp before Mr Law Smith's
house and, crossing, walked along Merrion square. Distantly behind him a
blind stripling tapped his way by the wall of College park.

Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell walked as far as
Mr Lewis Werner's cheerful windows, then turned and strode back along
Merrion square, his stickumbrelladustcoat dangling.

At the corner of Wilde's house he halted, frowned at Elijah's name
announced on the Metropolitan hall, frowned at the distant pleasance of
duke's lawn. His eyeglass flashed frowning in the sun. With ratsteeth
bared he muttered:

--_Coactus volui._

He strode on for Clare street, grinding his fierce word.

As he strode past Mr Bloom's dental windows the sway of his dustcoat
brushed rudely from its angle a slender tapping cane and swept onwards,
having buffeted a thewless body. The blind stripling turned his sickly
face after the striding form.

--God's curse on you, he said sourly, whoever you are! You're blinder
nor I am, you bitch's bastard!

* * * * *

Opposite Ruggy O'Donohoe's Master Patrick Aloysius Dignam, pawing the
pound and a half of Mangan's, late Fehrenbach's, porksteaks he had been
sent for, went along warm Wicklow street dawdling. It was too blooming
dull sitting in the parlour with Mrs Stoer and Mrs Quigley and Mrs
MacDowell and the blind down and they all at their sniffles and sipping
sups of the superior tawny sherry uncle Barney brought from Tunney's.
And they eating crumbs of the cottage fruitcake, jawing the whole
blooming time and sighing.

After Wicklow lane the window of Madame Doyle, courtdress milliner,
stopped him. He stood looking in at the two puckers stripped to their
pelts and putting up their props. From the sidemirrors two mourning
Masters Dignam gaped silently. Myler Keogh, Dublin's pet lamb, will
meet sergeantmajor Bennett, the Portobello bruiser, for a purse of fifty
sovereigns. Gob, that'd be a good pucking match to see. Myler Keogh,
that's the chap sparring out to him with the green sash. Two bar
entrance, soldiers half price. I could easy do a bunk on ma. Master
Dignam on his left turned as he turned. That's me in mourning. When
is it? May the twentysecond. Sure, the blooming thing is all over. He
turned to the right and on his right Master Dignam turned, his cap awry,
his collar sticking up. Buttoning it down, his chin lifted, he saw the
image of Marie Kendall, charming soubrette, beside the two puckers. One
of them mots that do be in the packets of fags Stoer smokes that his old
fellow welted hell out of him for one time he found out.

Master Dignam got his collar down and dawdled on. The best pucker going
for strength was Fitzsimons. One puck in the wind from that fellow would
knock you into the middle of next week, man. But the best pucker for
science was Jem Corbet before Fitzsimons knocked the stuffings out of
him, dodging and all.

In Grafton street Master Dignam saw a red flower in a toff's mouth and
a swell pair of kicks on him and he listening to what the drunk was
telling him and grinning all the time.

No Sandymount tram.

Master Dignam walked along Nassau street, shifted the porksteaks to
his other hand. His collar sprang up again and he tugged it down. The
blooming stud was too small for the buttonhole of the shirt, blooming
end to it. He met schoolboys with satchels. I'm not going tomorrow
either, stay away till Monday. He met other schoolboys. Do they notice
I'm in mourning? Uncle Barney said he'd get it into the paper tonight.
Then they'll all see it in the paper and read my name printed and pa's
name.

His face got all grey instead of being red like it was and there was a
fly walking over it up to his eye. The scrunch that was when they
were screwing the screws into the coffin: and the bumps when they were
bringing it downstairs.

Pa was inside it and ma crying in the parlour and uncle Barney telling
the men how to get it round the bend. A big coffin it was, and high and
heavylooking. How was that? The last night pa was boosed he was standing
on the landing there bawling out for his boots to go out to Tunney's for
to boose more and he looked butty and short in his shirt. Never see him
again. Death, that is. Pa is dead. My father is dead. He told me to be
a good son to ma. I couldn't hear the other things he said but I saw
his tongue and his teeth trying to say it better. Poor pa. That was
Mr Dignam, my father. I hope he's in purgatory now because he went to
confession to Father Conroy on Saturday night.

* * * * *

William Humble, earl of Dudley, and lady Dudley, accompanied by
lieutenantcolonel Heseltine, drove out after luncheon from the viceregal
lodge. In the following carriage were the honourable Mrs Paget, Miss de
Courcy and the honourable Gerald Ward A.D.C. in attendance.

The cavalcade passed out by the lower gate of Phoenix park saluted by
obsequious policemen and proceeded past Kingsbridge along the northern
quays. The viceroy was most cordially greeted on his way through the
metropolis. At Bloody bridge Mr Thomas Kernan beyond the river greeted
him vainly from afar Between Queen's and Whitworth bridges lord Dudley's
viceregal carriages passed and were unsaluted by Mr Dudley White, B.
L., M. A., who stood on Arran quay outside Mrs M. E. White's, the
pawnbroker's, at the corner of Arran street west stroking his nose with
his forefinger, undecided whether he should arrive at Phibsborough
more quickly by a triple change of tram or by hailing a car or on foot
through Smithfield, Constitution hill and Broadstone terminus. In the
porch of Four Courts Richie Goulding with the costbag of Goulding,
Collis and Ward saw him with surprise. Past Richmond bridge at the
doorstep of the office of Reuben J Dodd, solicitor, agent for the
Patriotic Insurance Company, an elderly female about to enter changed
her plan and retracing her steps by King's windows smiled credulously
on the representative of His Majesty. From its sluice in Wood quay wall
under Tom Devan's office Poddle river hung out in fealty a tongue of
liquid sewage. Above the crossblind of the Ormond hotel, gold by bronze,
Miss Kennedy's head by Miss Douce's head watched and admired. On Ormond
quay Mr Simon Dedalus, steering his way from the greenhouse for the
subsheriff's office, stood still in midstreet and brought his hat low.
His Excellency graciously returned Mr Dedalus' greeting. From Cahill's
corner the reverend Hugh C. Love, M.A., made obeisance unperceived,
mindful of lords deputies whose hands benignant had held of yore rich
advowsons. On Grattan bridge Lenehan and M'Coy, taking leave of each
other, watched the carriages go by. Passing by Roger Greene's office and
Dollard's big red printinghouse Gerty MacDowell, carrying the Catesby's
cork lino letters for her father who was laid up, knew by the style
it was the lord and lady lieutenant but she couldn't see what Her
Excellency had on because the tram and Spring's big yellow furniture van
had to stop in front of her on account of its being the lord lieutenant.
Beyond Lundy Foot's from the shaded door of Kavanagh's winerooms
John Wyse Nolan smiled with unseen coldness towards the lord
lieutenantgeneral and general governor of Ireland. The Right Honourable
William Humble, earl of Dudley, G. C. V. O., passed Micky Anderson's all
times ticking watches and Henry and James's wax smartsuited freshcheeked
models, the gentleman Henry, _dernier cri_ James. Over against Dame gate
Tom Rochford and Nosey Flynn watched the approach of the cavalcade. Tom
Rochford, seeing the eyes of lady Dudley fixed on him, took his thumbs
quickly out of the pockets of his claret waistcoat and doffed his cap to
her. A charming _soubrette,_ great Marie Kendall, with dauby cheeks and
lifted skirt smiled daubily from her poster upon William Humble, earl
of Dudley, and upon lieutenantcolonel H. G. Heseltine, and also upon
the honourable Gerald Ward A. D. C. From the window of the D. B. C. Buck
Mulligan gaily, and Haines gravely, gazed down on the viceregal equipage
over the shoulders of eager guests, whose mass of forms darkened the
chessboard whereon John Howard Parnell looked intently. In Fownes's
street Dilly Dedalus, straining her sight upward from Chardenal's first
French primer, saw sunshades spanned and wheelspokes spinning in the
glare. John Henry Menton, filling the doorway of Commercial Buildings,
stared from winebig oyster eyes, holding a fat gold hunter watch not
looked at in his fat left hand not feeling it. Where the foreleg of King
Billy's horse pawed the air Mrs Breen plucked her hastening husband
back from under the hoofs of the outriders. She shouted in his ear the
tidings. Understanding, he shifted his tomes to his left breast
and saluted the second carriage. The honourable Gerald Ward A.D.C.,
agreeably surprised, made haste to reply. At Ponsonby's corner a jaded
white flagon H. halted and four tallhatted white flagons halted behind
him, E.L.Y'S, while outriders pranced past and carriages. Opposite
Pigott's music warerooms Mr Denis J Maginni, professor of dancing &c,
gaily apparelled, gravely walked, outpassed by a viceroy and unobserved.
By the provost's wall came jauntily Blazes Boylan, stepping in tan shoes
and socks with skyblue clocks to the refrain of _My girl's a Yorkshire
girl._

Blazes Boylan presented to the leaders' skyblue frontlets and high
action a skyblue tie, a widebrimmed straw hat at a rakish angle and a
suit of indigo serge. His hands in his jacket pockets forgot to salute
but he offered to the three ladies the bold admiration of his eyes and
the red flower between his lips. As they drove along Nassau street His
Excellency drew the attention of his bowing consort to the programme of
music which was being discoursed in College park. Unseen brazen highland
laddies blared and drumthumped after the _cortÃ¨ge_:

     _But though she's a factory lass
     And wears no fancy clothes.
     Baraabum.
     Yet I've a sort of a
     Yorkshire relish for
     My little Yorkshire rose.
     Baraabum._

Thither of the wall the quartermile flat handicappers, M. C. Green, H.
Shrift, T. M. Patey, C. Scaife, J. B. Jeffs, G. N. Morphy, F. Stevenson,
C. Adderly and W. C. Huggard, started in pursuit. Striding past Finn's
hotel Cashel Boyle O'Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell stared through a
fierce eyeglass across the carriages at the head of Mr M. E. Solomons
in the window of the Austro-Hungarian viceconsulate. Deep in Leinster
street by Trinity's postern a loyal king's man, Hornblower, touched
his tallyho cap. As the glossy horses pranced by Merrion square Master
Patrick Aloysius Dignam, waiting, saw salutes being given to the gent
with the topper and raised also his new black cap with fingers greased
by porksteak paper. His collar too sprang up. The viceroy, on his way to
inaugurate the Mirus bazaar in aid of funds for Mercer's hospital,
drove with his following towards Lower Mount street. He passed a blind
stripling opposite Broadbent's. In Lower Mount street a pedestrian in a
brown macintosh, eating dry bread, passed swiftly and unscathed across
the viceroy's path. At the Royal Canal bridge, from his hoarding,
Mr Eugene Stratton, his blub lips agrin, bade all comers welcome to
Pembroke township. At Haddington road corner two sanded women halted
themselves, an umbrella and a bag in which eleven cockles rolled to view
with wonder the lord mayor and lady mayoress without his golden chain.
On Northumberland and Lansdowne roads His Excellency acknowledged
punctually salutes from rare male walkers, the salute of two small
schoolboys at the garden gate of the house said to have been admired
by the late queen when visiting the Irish capital with her husband, the
prince consort, in 1849 and the salute of Almidano Artifoni's sturdy
trousers swallowed by a closing door.



Bronze by gold heard the hoofirons, steelyringing Imperthnthn thnthnthn.

Chips, picking chips off rocky thumbnail, chips.

Horrid! And gold flushed more.

A husky fifenote blew.

Blew. Blue bloom is on the.

Goldpinnacled hair.

A jumping rose on satiny breast of satin, rose of Castile.

Trilling, trilling: Idolores.

Peep! Who's in the... peepofgold?

Tink cried to bronze in pity.

And a call, pure, long and throbbing. Longindying call.

Decoy. Soft word. But look: the bright stars fade. Notes chirruping
answer.

O rose! Castile. The morn is breaking.

Jingle jingle jaunted jingling.

Coin rang. Clock clacked.

Avowal. _Sonnez._ I could. Rebound of garter. Not leave thee. Smack. _La
cloche!_ Thigh smack. Avowal. Warm. Sweetheart, goodbye!

Jingle. Bloo.

Boomed crashing chords. When love absorbs. War! War! The tympanum.

A sail! A veil awave upon the waves.

Lost. Throstle fluted. All is lost now.

Horn. Hawhorn.

When first he saw. Alas!

Full tup. Full throb.

Warbling. Ah, lure! Alluring.

Martha! Come!

Clapclap. Clipclap. Clappyclap.

Goodgod henev erheard inall.

Deaf bald Pat brought pad knife took up.

A moonlit nightcall: far, far.

I feel so sad. P. S. So lonely blooming.

Listen!

The spiked and winding cold seahorn. Have you the? Each, and for other,
plash and silent roar.

Pearls: when she. Liszt's rhapsodies. Hissss.

You don't?

Did not: no, no: believe: Lidlyd. With a cock with a carra.

Black. Deepsounding. Do, Ben, do.

Wait while you wait. Hee hee. Wait while you hee.

But wait!

Low in dark middle earth. Embedded ore.

Naminedamine. Preacher is he:

All gone. All fallen.

Tiny, her tremulous fernfoils of maidenhair.

Amen! He gnashed in fury.

Fro. To, fro. A baton cool protruding.

Bronzelydia by Minagold.

By bronze, by gold, in oceangreen of shadow. Bloom. Old Bloom.

One rapped, one tapped, with a carra, with a cock.

Pray for him! Pray, good people!

His gouty fingers nakkering.

Big Benaben. Big Benben.

Last rose Castile of summer left bloom I feel so sad alone.

Pwee! Little wind piped wee.

True men. Lid Ker Cow De and Doll. Ay, ay. Like you men. Will lift your
tschink with tschunk.

Fff! Oo!

Where bronze from anear? Where gold from afar? Where hoofs?

Rrrpr. Kraa. Kraandl.

Then not till then. My eppripfftaph. Be pfrwritt.

Done.

Begin!

Bronze by gold, miss Douce's head by miss Kennedy's head, over the
crossblind of the Ormond bar heard the viceregal hoofs go by, ringing
steel.

--Is that her? asked miss Kennedy.

Miss Douce said yes, sitting with his ex, pearl grey and _eau de Nil._

--Exquisite contrast, miss Kennedy said.

When all agog miss Douce said eagerly:

--Look at the fellow in the tall silk.

--Who? Where? gold asked more eagerly.

--In the second carriage, miss Douce's wet lips said, laughing in the
sun.

He's looking. Mind till I see.

She darted, bronze, to the backmost corner, flattening her face against
the pane in a halo of hurried breath.

Her wet lips tittered:

--He's killed looking back.

She laughed:

--O wept! Aren't men frightful idiots?

With sadness.

Miss Kennedy sauntered sadly from bright light, twining a loose hair
behind an ear. Sauntering sadly, gold no more, she twisted twined a
hair.

Sadly she twined in sauntering gold hair behind a curving ear.

--It's them has the fine times, sadly then she said.

A man.

Bloowho went by by Moulang's pipes bearing in his breast the sweets
of sin, by Wine's antiques, in memory bearing sweet sinful words, by
Carroll's dusky battered plate, for Raoul.

The boots to them, them in the bar, them barmaids came. For them
unheeding him he banged on the counter his tray of chattering china. And

--There's your teas, he said.

Miss Kennedy with manners transposed the teatray down to an upturned
lithia crate, safe from eyes, low.

--What is it? loud boots unmannerly asked.

--Find out, miss Douce retorted, leaving her spyingpoint.

--Your _beau,_ is it?

A haughty bronze replied:

--I'll complain to Mrs de Massey on you if I hear any more of your
impertinent insolence.

--Imperthnthn thnthnthn, bootssnout sniffed rudely, as he retreated as
she threatened as he had come.

Bloom.

On her flower frowning miss Douce said:

--Most aggravating that young brat is. If he doesn't conduct himself
I'll wring his ear for him a yard long.

Ladylike in exquisite contrast.

--Take no notice, miss Kennedy rejoined.

She poured in a teacup tea, then back in the teapot tea. They cowered
under their reef of counter, waiting on footstools, crates upturned,
waiting for their teas to draw. They pawed their blouses, both of black
satin, two and nine a yard, waiting for their teas to draw, and two and
seven.

Yes, bronze from anear, by gold from afar, heard steel from anear, hoofs
ring from afar, and heard steelhoofs ringhoof ringsteel.

--Am I awfully sunburnt?

Miss bronze unbloused her neck.

--No, said miss Kennedy. It gets brown after. Did you try the borax with
the cherry laurel water?

Miss Douce halfstood to see her skin askance in the barmirror
gildedlettered where hock and claret glasses shimmered and in their
midst a shell.

--And leave it to my hands, she said.

--Try it with the glycerine, miss Kennedy advised.

Bidding her neck and hands adieu miss Douce

--Those things only bring out a rash, replied, reseated. I asked that
old fogey in Boyd's for something for my skin.

Miss Kennedy, pouring now a fulldrawn tea, grimaced and prayed:

--O, don't remind me of him for mercy' sake!

--But wait till I tell you, miss Douce entreated.

Sweet tea miss Kennedy having poured with milk plugged both two ears
with little fingers.

--No, don't, she cried.

--I won't listen, she cried.

But Bloom?

Miss Douce grunted in snuffy fogey's tone:

--For your what? says he.

Miss Kennedy unplugged her ears to hear, to speak: but said, but prayed
again:

--Don't let me think of him or I'll expire. The hideous old wretch! That
night in the Antient Concert Rooms.

She sipped distastefully her brew, hot tea, a sip, sipped, sweet tea.

--Here he was, miss Douce said, cocking her bronze head three quarters,
ruffling her nosewings. Hufa! Hufa!

Shrill shriek of laughter sprang from miss Kennedy's throat. Miss Douce
huffed and snorted down her nostrils that quivered imperthnthn like a
snout in quest.

--O! shrieking, miss Kennedy cried. Will you ever forget his goggle eye?

Miss Douce chimed in in deep bronze laughter, shouting:

--And your other eye!

Bloowhose dark eye read Aaron Figatner's name. Why do I always think
Figather? Gathering figs, I think. And Prosper Lore's huguenot name.
By Bassi's blessed virgins Bloom's dark eyes went by. Bluerobed, white
under, come to me. God they believe she is: or goddess. Those today. I
could not see. That fellow spoke. A student. After with Dedalus' son.
He might be Mulligan. All comely virgins. That brings those rakes of
fellows in: her white.

By went his eyes. The sweets of sin. Sweet are the sweets.

Of sin.

In a giggling peal young goldbronze voices blended, Douce with Kennedy
your other eye. They threw young heads back, bronze gigglegold, to let
freefly their laughter, screaming, your other, signals to each other,
high piercing notes.

Ah, panting, sighing, sighing, ah, fordone, their mirth died down.

Miss Kennedy lipped her cup again, raised, drank a sip and
gigglegiggled. Miss Douce, bending over the teatray, ruffled again her
nose and rolled droll fattened eyes. Again Kennygiggles, stooping,
her fair pinnacles of hair, stooping, her tortoise napecomb showed,
spluttered out of her mouth her tea, choking in tea and laughter,
coughing with choking, crying:

--O greasy eyes! Imagine being married to a man like that! she cried.
With his bit of beard!

Douce gave full vent to a splendid yell, a full yell of full woman,
delight, joy, indignation.

--Married to the greasy nose! she yelled.

Shrill, with deep laughter, after, gold after bronze, they urged each
each to peal after peal, ringing in changes, bronzegold, goldbronze,
shrilldeep, to laughter after laughter. And then laughed more. Greasy I
knows. Exhausted, breathless, their shaken heads they laid, braided and
pinnacled by glossycombed, against the counterledge. All flushed (O!),
panting, sweating (O!), all breathless.

Married to Bloom, to greaseabloom.

--O saints above! miss Douce said, sighed above her jumping rose. I
wished

I hadn't laughed so much. I feel all wet.

--O, miss Douce! miss Kennedy protested. You horrid thing!

And flushed yet more (you horrid!), more goldenly.

By Cantwell's offices roved Greaseabloom, by Ceppi's virgins, bright of
their oils. Nannetti's father hawked those things about, wheedling at
doors as I. Religion pays. Must see him for that par. Eat first. I want.
Not yet. At four, she said. Time ever passing. Clockhands turning. On.
Where eat? The Clarence, Dolphin. On. For Raoul. Eat. If I net five
guineas with those ads. The violet silk petticoats. Not yet. The sweets
of sin.

Flushed less, still less, goldenly paled.

Into their bar strolled Mr Dedalus. Chips, picking chips off one of his
rocky thumbnails. Chips. He strolled.

--O, welcome back, miss Douce.

He held her hand. Enjoyed her holidays?

--Tiptop.

He hoped she had nice weather in Rostrevor.

--Gorgeous, she said. Look at the holy show I am. Lying out on the
strand all day.

Bronze whiteness.

--That was exceedingly naughty of you, Mr Dedalus told her and pressed
her hand indulgently. Tempting poor simple males.

Miss Douce of satin douced her arm away.

--O go away! she said. You're very simple, I don't think.

He was.

--Well now I am, he mused. I looked so simple in the cradle they
christened me simple Simon.

--You must have been a doaty, miss Douce made answer. And what did the
doctor order today?

--Well now, he mused, whatever you say yourself. I think I'll trouble
you for some fresh water and a half glass of whisky.

Jingle.

--With the greatest alacrity, miss Douce agreed.

With grace of alacrity towards the mirror gilt Cantrell and Cochrane's
she turned herself. With grace she tapped a measure of gold whisky from
her crystal keg. Forth from the skirt of his coat Mr Dedalus brought
pouch and pipe. Alacrity she served. He blew through the flue two husky
fifenotes.

--By Jove, he mused, I often wanted to see the Mourne mountains. Must
be a great tonic in the air down there. But a long threatening comes at
last, they say. Yes. Yes.

Yes. He fingered shreds of hair, her maidenhair, her mermaid's, into the
bowl. Chips. Shreds. Musing. Mute.

None nought said nothing. Yes.

Gaily miss Douce polished a tumbler, trilling:

--_O, Idolores, queen of the eastern seas!_

--Was Mr Lidwell in today?

In came Lenehan. Round him peered Lenehan. Mr Bloom reached Essex
bridge. Yes, Mr Bloom crossed bridge of Yessex. To Martha I must write.
Buy paper. Daly's. Girl there civil. Bloom. Old Bloom. Blue bloom is on
the rye.

--He was in at lunchtime, miss Douce said.

Lenehan came forward.

--Was Mr Boylan looking for me?

He asked. She answered:

--Miss Kennedy, was Mr Boylan in while I was upstairs?

She asked. Miss voice of Kennedy answered, a second teacup poised, her
gaze upon a page:

--No. He was not.

Miss gaze of Kennedy, heard, not seen, read on. Lenehan round the
sandwichbell wound his round body round.

--Peep! Who's in the corner?

No glance of Kennedy rewarding him he yet made overtures. To mind her
stops. To read only the black ones: round o and crooked ess.

Jingle jaunty jingle.

Girlgold she read and did not glance. Take no notice. She took no notice
while he read by rote a solfa fable for her, plappering flatly:

--Ah fox met ah stork. Said thee fox too thee stork: Will you put your
bill down inn my troath and pull upp ah bone?

He droned in vain. Miss Douce turned to her tea aside.

He sighed aside:

--Ah me! O my!

He greeted Mr Dedalus and got a nod.

--Greetings from the famous son of a famous father.

--Who may he be? Mr Dedalus asked.

Lenehan opened most genial arms. Who?

--Who may he be? he asked. Can you ask? Stephen, the youthful bard.

Dry.

Mr Dedalus, famous father, laid by his dry filled pipe.

--I see, he said. I didn't recognise him for the moment. I hear he is
keeping very select company. Have you seen him lately?

He had.

--I quaffed the nectarbowl with him this very day, said Lenehan. In
Mooney's _en ville_ and in Mooney's _sur mer._ He had received the rhino
for the labour of his muse.

He smiled at bronze's teabathed lips, at listening lips and eyes:

--The _Ã©lite_ of Erin hung upon his lips. The ponderous pundit, Hugh

MacHugh, Dublin's most brilliant scribe and editor and that minstrel boy
of the wild wet west who is known by the euphonious appellation of the
O'Madden Burke.

After an interval Mr Dedalus raised his grog and

--That must have been highly diverting, said he. I see.

He see. He drank. With faraway mourning mountain eye. Set down his
glass.

He looked towards the saloon door.

--I see you have moved the piano.

--The tuner was in today, miss Douce replied, tuning it for the smoking
concert and I never heard such an exquisite player.

--Is that a fact?

--Didn't he, miss Kennedy? The real classical, you know. And blind too,
poor fellow. Not twenty I'm sure he was.

--Is that a fact? Mr Dedalus said.

He drank and strayed away.

--So sad to look at his face, miss Douce condoled.

God's curse on bitch's bastard.

Tink to her pity cried a diner's bell. To the door of the bar and
diningroom came bald Pat, came bothered Pat, came Pat, waiter of Ormond.
Lager for diner. Lager without alacrity she served.

With patience Lenehan waited for Boylan with impatience, for
jinglejaunty blazes boy.

Upholding the lid he (who?) gazed in the coffin (coffin?) at the oblique
triple (piano!) wires. He pressed (the same who pressed indulgently her
hand), soft pedalling, a triple of keys to see the thicknesses of felt
advancing, to hear the muffled hammerfall in action.

Two sheets cream vellum paper one reserve two envelopes when I was in
Wisdom Hely's wise Bloom in Daly's Henry Flower bought. Are you not
happy in your home? Flower to console me and a pin cuts lo. Means
something, language of flow. Was it a daisy? Innocence that is.
Respectable girl meet after mass. Thanks awfully muchly. Wise Bloom eyed
on the door a poster, a swaying mermaid smoking mid nice waves. Smoke
mermaids, coolest whiff of all. Hair streaming: lovelorn. For some man.
For Raoul. He eyed and saw afar on Essex bridge a gay hat riding on a
jaunting car. It is. Again. Third time. Coincidence.

Jingling on supple rubbers it jaunted from the bridge to Ormond quay.
Follow. Risk it. Go quick. At four. Near now. Out.

--Twopence, sir, the shopgirl dared to say.

--Aha... I was forgetting... Excuse...

--And four.

At four she. Winsomely she on Bloohimwhom smiled. Bloo smi qui go.
Ternoon. Think you're the only pebble on the beach? Does that to all.

For men.

In drowsy silence gold bent on her page.

From the saloon a call came, long in dying. That was a tuningfork the
tuner had that he forgot that he now struck. A call again. That he now
poised that it now throbbed. You hear? It throbbed, pure, purer, softly
and softlier, its buzzing prongs. Longer in dying call.

Pat paid for diner's popcorked bottle: and over tumbler, tray and
popcorked bottle ere he went he whispered, bald and bothered, with miss

Douce.

--_The bright stars fade_...

A voiceless song sang from within, singing:

--... _the morn is breaking._

A duodene of birdnotes chirruped bright treble answer under sensitive
hands. Brightly the keys, all twinkling, linked, all harpsichording,
called to a voice to sing the strain of dewy morn, of youth, of love's
leavetaking, life's, love's morn.

--_The dewdrops pearl_...

Lenehan's lips over the counter lisped a low whistle of decoy.

--But look this way, he said, rose of Castile.

Jingle jaunted by the curb and stopped.

She rose and closed her reading, rose of Castile: fretted, forlorn,
dreamily rose.

--Did she fall or was she pushed? he asked her.

She answered, slighting:

--Ask no questions and you'll hear no lies.

Like lady, ladylike.

Blazes Boylan's smart tan shoes creaked on the barfloor where he strode.
Yes, gold from anear by bronze from afar. Lenehan heard and knew and
hailed him:

--See the conquering hero comes.

Between the car and window, warily walking, went Bloom, unconquered
hero. See me he might. The seat he sat on: warm. Black wary hecat walked
towards Richie Goulding's legal bag, lifted aloft, saluting.

--_And I from thee_...

--I heard you were round, said Blazes Boylan.

He touched to fair miss Kennedy a rim of his slanted straw. She smiled
on him. But sister bronze outsmiled her, preening for him her richer
hair, a bosom and a rose.

Smart Boylan bespoke potions.

--What's your cry? Glass of bitter? Glass of bitter, please, and a
sloegin for me. Wire in yet?

Not yet. At four she. Who said four?

Cowley's red lugs and bulging apple in the door of the sheriff's office.

Avoid. Goulding a chance. What is he doing in the Ormond? Car waiting.

Wait.

Hello. Where off to? Something to eat? I too was just. In here. What,
Ormond? Best value in Dublin. Is that so? Diningroom. Sit tight there.
See, not be seen. I think I'll join you. Come on. Richie led on. Bloom
followed bag. Dinner fit for a prince.

Miss Douce reached high to take a flagon, stretching her satin arm, her
bust, that all but burst, so high.

--O! O! jerked Lenehan, gasping at each stretch. O!

But easily she seized her prey and led it low in triumph.

--Why don't you grow? asked Blazes Boylan.

Shebronze, dealing from her oblique jar thick syrupy liquor for his
lips, looked as it flowed (flower in his coat: who gave him?), and
syrupped with her voice:

--Fine goods in small parcels.

That is to say she. Neatly she poured slowsyrupy sloe.

--Here's fortune, Blazes said.

He pitched a broad coin down. Coin rang.

--Hold on, said Lenehan, till I...

--Fortune, he wished, lifting his bubbled ale.

--Sceptre will win in a canter, he said.

--I plunged a bit, said Boylan winking and drinking. Not on my own, you
know. Fancy of a friend of mine.

Lenehan still drank and grinned at his tilted ale and at miss Douce's
lips that all but hummed, not shut, the oceansong her lips had trilled.

Idolores. The eastern seas.

Clock whirred. Miss Kennedy passed their way (flower, wonder who gave),
bearing away teatray. Clock clacked.

Miss Douce took Boylan's coin, struck boldly the cashregister. It
clanged. Clock clacked. Fair one of Egypt teased and sorted in the till
and hummed and handed coins in change. Look to the west. A clack. For
me.

--What time is that? asked Blazes Boylan. Four?

O'clock.

Lenehan, small eyes ahunger on her humming, bust ahumming, tugged Blazes
Boylan's elbowsleeve.

--Let's hear the time, he said.

The bag of Goulding, Collis, Ward led Bloom by ryebloom flowered tables.
Aimless he chose with agitated aim, bald Pat attending, a table near
the door. Be near. At four. Has he forgotten? Perhaps a trick. Not come:
whet appetite. I couldn't do. Wait, wait. Pat, waiter, waited.

Sparkling bronze azure eyed Blazure's skyblue bow and eyes.

--Go on, pressed Lenehan. There's no-one. He never heard.

--... _to Flora's lips did hie._

High, a high note pealed in the treble clear.

Bronzedouce communing with her rose that sank and rose sought

Blazes Boylan's flower and eyes.

--Please, please.

He pleaded over returning phrases of avowal.

--_I could not leave thee_...

--Afterwits, miss Douce promised coyly.

--No, now, urged Lenehan. _Sonnezlacloche!_ O do! There's no-one.

She looked. Quick. Miss Kenn out of earshot. Sudden bent. Two kindling
faces watched her bend.

Quavering the chords strayed from the air, found it again, lost chord,
and lost and found it, faltering.

--Go on! Do! _Sonnez!_

Bending, she nipped a peak of skirt above her knee. Delayed. Taunted
them still, bending, suspending, with wilful eyes.

_--Sonnez!_

Smack. She set free sudden in rebound her nipped elastic garter
smackwarm against her smackable a woman's warmhosed thigh.

--_La Cloche!_ cried gleeful Lenehan. Trained by owner. No sawdust
there.

She smilesmirked supercilious (wept! aren't men?), but, lightward
gliding, mild she smiled on Boylan.

--You're the essence of vulgarity, she in gliding said.

Boylan, eyed, eyed. Tossed to fat lips his chalice, drank off his
chalice tiny, sucking the last fat violet syrupy drops. His spellbound
eyes went after, after her gliding head as it went down the bar by
mirrors, gilded arch for ginger ale, hock and claret glasses shimmering,
a spiky shell, where it concerted, mirrored, bronze with sunnier bronze.

Yes, bronze from anearby.

--... _Sweetheart, goodbye!_

--I'm off, said Boylan with impatience.

He slid his chalice brisk away, grasped his change.

--Wait a shake, begged Lenehan, drinking quickly. I wanted to tell you.

Tom Rochford...

--Come on to blazes, said Blazes Boylan, going.

Lenehan gulped to go.

--Got the horn or what? he said. Wait. I'm coming.

He followed the hasty creaking shoes but stood by nimbly by the
threshold, saluting forms, a bulky with a slender.

--How do you do, Mr Dollard?

--Eh? How do? How do? Ben Dollard's vague bass answered, turning an
instant from Father Cowley's woe. He won't give you any trouble, Bob.
Alf Bergan will speak to the long fellow. We'll put a barleystraw in
that Judas Iscariot's ear this time.

Sighing Mr Dedalus came through the saloon, a finger soothing an eyelid.

--Hoho, we will, Ben Dollard yodled jollily. Come on, Simon. Give us a
ditty. We heard the piano.

Bald Pat, bothered waiter, waited for drink orders. Power for Richie.
And Bloom? Let me see. Not make him walk twice. His corns. Four now. How
warm this black is. Course nerves a bit. Refracts (is it?) heat. Let me
see. Cider. Yes, bottle of cider.

--What's that? Mr Dedalus said. I was only vamping, man.

--Come on, come on, Ben Dollard called. Begone dull care. Come, Bob.

He ambled Dollard, bulky slops, before them (hold that fellow with the:
hold him now) into the saloon. He plumped him Dollard on the stool. His
gouty paws plumped chords. Plumped, stopped abrupt.

Bald Pat in the doorway met tealess gold returning. Bothered, he wanted
Power and cider. Bronze by the window, watched, bronze from afar.

Jingle a tinkle jaunted.

Bloom heard a jing, a little sound. He's off. Light sob of breath Bloom
sighed on the silent bluehued flowers. Jingling. He's gone. Jingle.
Hear.

--Love and War, Ben, Mr Dedalus said. God be with old times.

Miss Douce's brave eyes, unregarded, turned from the crossblind, smitten
by sunlight. Gone. Pensive (who knows?), smitten (the smiting light),
she lowered the dropblind with a sliding cord. She drew down pensive
(why did he go so quick when I?) about her bronze, over the bar where
bald stood by sister gold, inexquisite contrast, contrast inexquisite
nonexquisite, slow cool dim seagreen sliding depth of shadow, _eau de
Nil._

--Poor old Goodwin was the pianist that night, Father Cowley reminded
them. There was a slight difference of opinion between himself and the
Collard grand.

There was.

--A symposium all his own, Mr Dedalus said. The devil wouldn't stop him.
He was a crotchety old fellow in the primary stage of drink.

--God, do you remember? Ben bulky Dollard said, turning from the
punished keyboard. And by Japers I had no wedding garment.

They laughed all three. He had no wed. All trio laughed. No wedding
garment.

--Our friend Bloom turned in handy that night, Mr Dedalus said. Where's
my pipe, by the way?

He wandered back to the bar to the lost chord pipe. Bald Pat carried two
diners' drinks, Richie and Poldy. And Father Cowley laughed again.

--I saved the situation, Ben, I think.

--You did, averred Ben Dollard. I remember those tight trousers too.
That was a brilliant idea, Bob.

Father Cowley blushed to his brilliant purply lobes. He saved the situa.
Tight trou. Brilliant ide.

--I knew he was on the rocks, he said. The wife was playing the piano in
the coffee palace on Saturdays for a very trifling consideration and
who was it gave me the wheeze she was doing the other business? Do you
remember? We had to search all Holles street to find them till the
chap in Keogh's gave us the number. Remember? Ben remembered, his broad
visage wondering.

--By God, she had some luxurious operacloaks and things there.

Mr Dedalus wandered back, pipe in hand.

--Merrion square style. Balldresses, by God, and court dresses. He
wouldn't take any money either. What? Any God's quantity of cocked hats
and boleros and trunkhose. What?

--Ay, ay, Mr Dedalus nodded. Mrs Marion Bloom has left off clothes of
all descriptions.

Jingle jaunted down the quays. Blazes sprawled on bounding tyres.

Liver and bacon. Steak and kidney pie. Right, sir. Right, Pat.

Mrs Marion. Met him pike hoses. Smell of burn. Of Paul de Kock. Nice
name he.

--What's this her name was? A buxom lassy. Marion...

--Tweedy.

--Yes. Is she alive?

--And kicking.

--She was a daughter of...

--Daughter of the regiment.

--Yes, begad. I remember the old drummajor.

Mr Dedalus struck, whizzed, lit, puffed savoury puff after

--Irish? I don't know, faith. Is she, Simon?

Puff after stiff, a puff, strong, savoury, crackling.

--Buccinator muscle is... What?... Bit rusty... O, she is... My
Irish Molly, O.

He puffed a pungent plumy blast.

--From the rock of Gibraltar... all the way.

They pined in depth of ocean shadow, gold by the beerpull, bronze
by maraschino, thoughtful all two. Mina Kennedy, 4 Lismore terrace,
Drumcondra with Idolores, a queen, Dolores, silent.

Pat served, uncovered dishes. Leopold cut liverslices. As said before he
ate with relish the inner organs, nutty gizzards, fried cods' roes while
Richie Goulding, Collis, Ward ate steak and kidney, steak then kidney,
bite by bite of pie he ate Bloom ate they ate.

Bloom with Goulding, married in silence, ate. Dinners fit for princes.

By Bachelor's walk jogjaunty jingled Blazes Boylan, bachelor, in sun in
heat, mare's glossy rump atrot, with flick of whip, on bounding tyres:
sprawled, warmseated, Boylan impatience, ardentbold. Horn. Have you the?
Horn. Have you the? Haw haw horn.

Over their voices Dollard bassooned attack, booming over bombarding
chords:

--_When love absorbs my ardent soul_...

Roll of Bensoulbenjamin rolled to the quivery loveshivery roofpanes.

--War! War! cried Father Cowley. You're the warrior.

--So I am, Ben Warrior laughed. I was thinking of your landlord. Love or
money.

He stopped. He wagged huge beard, huge face over his blunder huge.

--Sure, you'd burst the tympanum of her ear, man, Mr Dedalus said
through smoke aroma, with an organ like yours.

In bearded abundant laughter Dollard shook upon the keyboard. He would.

--Not to mention another membrane, Father Cowley added. Half time, Ben.
_Amoroso ma non troppo._ Let me there.

Miss Kennedy served two gentlemen with tankards of cool stout. She
passed a remark. It was indeed, first gentleman said, beautiful weather.
They drank cool stout. Did she know where the lord lieutenant was going?
And heard steelhoofs ringhoof ring. No, she couldn't say. But it would
be in the paper. O, she need not trouble. No trouble. She waved about
her outspread _Independent,_ searching, the lord lieutenant, her
pinnacles of hair slowmoving, lord lieuten. Too much trouble,
first gentleman said. O, not in the least. Way he looked that. Lord
lieutenant. Gold by bronze heard iron steel.

     --............ _my ardent soul_
     _I care not foror the morrow._

In liver gravy Bloom mashed mashed potatoes. Love and War someone is.
Ben Dollard's famous. Night he ran round to us to borrow a dress suit
for that concert. Trousers tight as a drum on him. Musical porkers.
Molly did laugh when he went out. Threw herself back across the bed,
screaming, kicking. With all his belongings on show. O saints above,
I'm drenched! O, the women in the front row! O, I never laughed so many!
Well, of course that's what gives him the base barreltone. For instance
eunuchs. Wonder who's playing. Nice touch. Must be Cowley. Musical.
Knows whatever note you play. Bad breath he has, poor chap. Stopped.

Miss Douce, engaging, Lydia Douce, bowed to suave solicitor, George
Lidwell, gentleman, entering. Good afternoon. She gave her moist (a
lady's) hand to his firm clasp. Afternoon. Yes, she was back. To the old
dingdong again.

--Your friends are inside, Mr Lidwell.

George Lidwell, suave, solicited, held a lydiahand.

Bloom ate liv as said before. Clean here at least. That chap in the
Burton, gummy with gristle. No-one here: Goulding and I. Clean tables,
flowers, mitres of napkins. Pat to and fro. Bald Pat. Nothing to do.
Best value in Dub.

Piano again. Cowley it is. Way he sits in to it, like one together,
mutual understanding. Tiresome shapers scraping fiddles, eye on the
bowend, sawing the cello, remind you of toothache. Her high long snore.
Night we were in the box. Trombone under blowing like a grampus, between
the acts, other brass chap unscrewing, emptying spittle. Conductor's
legs too, bagstrousers, jiggedy jiggedy. Do right to hide them.

Jiggedy jingle jaunty jaunty.

Only the harp. Lovely. Gold glowering light. Girl touched it. Poop of a
lovely. Gravy's rather good fit for a. Golden ship. Erin. The harp that
once or twice. Cool hands. Ben Howth, the rhododendrons. We are their
harps. I. He. Old. Young.

--Ah, I couldn't, man, Mr Dedalus said, shy, listless.

Strongly.

--Go on, blast you! Ben Dollard growled. Get it out in bits.

--_M'appari,_ Simon, Father Cowley said.

Down stage he strode some paces, grave, tall in affliction, his long
arms outheld. Hoarsely the apple of his throat hoarsed softly. Softly he
sang to a dusty seascape there: _A Last Farewell._ A headland, a ship, a
sail upon the billows. Farewell. A lovely girl, her veil awave upon the
wind upon the headland, wind around her.

Cowley sang:

     _--M'appari tutt'amor:
     Il mio sguardo l'incontr..._

She waved, unhearing Cowley, her veil, to one departing, dear one, to
wind, love, speeding sail, return.

--Go on, Simon.

--Ah, sure, my dancing days are done, Ben... Well...

Mr Dedalus laid his pipe to rest beside the tuningfork and, sitting,
touched the obedient keys.

--No, Simon, Father Cowley turned. Play it in the original. One flat.

The keys, obedient, rose higher, told, faltered, confessed, confused.

Up stage strode Father Cowley.

--Here, Simon, I'll accompany you, he said. Get up.

By Graham Lemon's pineapple rock, by Elvery's elephant jingly jogged.
Steak, kidney, liver, mashed, at meat fit for princes sat princes Bloom
and Goulding. Princes at meat they raised and drank, Power and cider.

Most beautiful tenor air ever written, Richie said: _Sonnambula._ He
heard Joe Maas sing that one night. Ah, what M'Guckin! Yes. In his way.
Choirboy style. Maas was the boy. Massboy. A lyrical tenor if you like.
Never forget it. Never.

Tenderly Bloom over liverless bacon saw the tightened features strain.
Backache he. Bright's bright eye. Next item on the programme. Paying the
piper. Pills, pounded bread, worth a guinea a box. Stave it off awhile.
Sings too: _Down among the dead men._ Appropriate. Kidney pie. Sweets to
the. Not making much hand of it. Best value in. Characteristic of him.
Power. Particular about his drink. Flaw in the glass, fresh Vartry
water. Fecking matches from counters to save. Then squander a sovereign
in dribs and drabs. And when he's wanted not a farthing. Screwed
refusing to pay his fare. Curious types.

Never would Richie forget that night. As long as he lived: never. In the
gods of the old Royal with little Peake. And when the first note.

Speech paused on Richie's lips.

Coming out with a whopper now. Rhapsodies about damn all.

Believes his own lies. Does really. Wonderful liar. But want a good
memory.

--Which air is that? asked Leopold Bloom.

--_All is lost now_.

Richie cocked his lips apout. A low incipient note sweet banshee
murmured: all. A thrush. A throstle. His breath, birdsweet, good teeth
he's proud of, fluted with plaintive woe. Is lost. Rich sound. Two
notes in one there. Blackbird I heard in the hawthorn valley. Taking my
motives he twined and turned them. All most too new call is lost in all.
Echo. How sweet the answer. How is that done? All lost now. Mournful he
whistled. Fall, surrender, lost.

Bloom bent leopold ear, turning a fringe of doyley down under the vase.
Order. Yes, I remember. Lovely air. In sleep she went to him. Innocence
in the moon. Brave. Don't know their danger. Still hold her back. Call
name. Touch water. Jingle jaunty. Too late. She longed to go. That's
why. Woman. As easy stop the sea. Yes: all is lost.

--A beautiful air, said Bloom lost Leopold. I know it well.

Never in all his life had Richie Goulding.

He knows it well too. Or he feels. Still harping on his daughter. Wise
child that knows her father, Dedalus said. Me?

Bloom askance over liverless saw. Face of the all is lost. Rollicking
Richie once. Jokes old stale now. Wagging his ear. Napkinring in his
eye. Now begging letters he sends his son with. Crosseyed Walter sir I
did sir. Wouldn't trouble only I was expecting some money. Apologise.

Piano again. Sounds better than last time I heard. Tuned probably.
Stopped again.

Dollard and Cowley still urged the lingering singer out with it.

--With it, Simon.

--It, Simon.

--Ladies and gentlemen, I am most deeply obliged by your kind
solicitations.

--It, Simon.

--I have no money but if you will lend me your attention I shall
endeavour to sing to you of a heart bowed down.

By the sandwichbell in screening shadow Lydia, her bronze and rose, a
lady's grace, gave and withheld: as in cool glaucous _eau de Nil_ Mina
to tankards two her pinnacles of gold.

The harping chords of prelude closed. A chord, longdrawn, expectant,
drew a voice away.

--_When first I saw that form endearing_...

Richie turned.

--Si Dedalus' voice, he said.

Braintipped, cheek touched with flame, they listened feeling that flow
endearing flow over skin limbs human heart soul spine. Bloom signed to
Pat, bald Pat is a waiter hard of hearing, to set ajar the door of the
bar. The door of the bar. So. That will do. Pat, waiter, waited, waiting
to hear, for he was hard of hear by the door.

--_Sorrow from me seemed to depart._

Through the hush of air a voice sang to them, low, not rain, not leaves
in murmur, like no voice of strings or reeds or whatdoyoucallthem
dulcimers touching their still ears with words, still hearts of their
each his remembered lives. Good, good to hear: sorrow from them each
seemed to from both depart when first they heard. When first they saw,
lost Richie Poldy, mercy of beauty, heard from a person wouldn't expect
it in the least, her first merciful lovesoft oftloved word.

Love that is singing: love's old sweet song. Bloom unwound slowly the
elastic band of his packet. Love's old sweet _sonnez la_ gold. Bloom
wound a skein round four forkfingers, stretched it, relaxed, and wound
it round his troubled double, fourfold, in octave, gyved them fast.

--_Full of hope and all delighted_...

Tenors get women by the score. Increase their flow. Throw flower at his
feet. When will we meet? My head it simply. Jingle all delighted. He
can't sing for tall hats. Your head it simply swurls. Perfumed for him.
What perfume does your wife? I want to know. Jing. Stop. Knock. Last
look at mirror always before she answers the door. The hall. There? How
do you? I do well. There? What? Or? Phial of cachous, kissing comfits,
in her satchel. Yes? Hands felt for the opulent.

Alas the voice rose, sighing, changed: loud, full, shining, proud.

--_But alas, 'twas idle dreaming_...

Glorious tone he has still. Cork air softer also their brogue. Silly
man! Could have made oceans of money. Singing wrong words. Wore out
his wife: now sings. But hard to tell. Only the two themselves. If he
doesn't break down. Keep a trot for the avenue. His hands and feet sing
too. Drink. Nerves overstrung. Must be abstemious to sing. Jenny Lind
soup: stock, sage, raw eggs, half pint of cream. For creamy dreamy.

Tenderness it welled: slow, swelling, full it throbbed. That's the chat.
Ha, give! Take! Throb, a throb, a pulsing proud erect.

Words? Music? No: it's what's behind.

Bloom looped, unlooped, noded, disnoded.

Bloom. Flood of warm jamjam lickitup secretness flowed to flow in music
out, in desire, dark to lick flow invading. Tipping her tepping her
tapping her topping her. Tup. Pores to dilate dilating. Tup. The joy
the feel the warm the. Tup. To pour o'er sluices pouring gushes. Flood,
gush, flow, joygush, tupthrob. Now! Language of love.

--... _ray of hope is_...

Beaming. Lydia for Lidwell squeak scarcely hear so ladylike the muse
unsqueaked a ray of hopk.

_Martha_ it is. Coincidence. Just going to write. Lionel's song.
Lovely name you have. Can't write. Accept my little pres. Play on her
heartstrings pursestrings too. She's a. I called you naughty boy. Still
the name: Martha. How strange! Today.

The voice of Lionel returned, weaker but unwearied. It sang again to
Richie Poldy Lydia Lidwell also sang to Pat open mouth ear waiting to
wait. How first he saw that form endearing, how sorrow seemed to part,
how look, form, word charmed him Gould Lidwell, won Pat Bloom's heart.

Wish I could see his face, though. Explain better. Why the barber in
Drago's always looked my face when I spoke his face in the glass. Still
hear it better here than in the bar though farther.

--_Each graceful look_...

First night when first I saw her at Mat Dillon's in Terenure. Yellow,
black lace she wore. Musical chairs. We two the last. Fate. After her.
Fate.

Round and round slow. Quick round. We two. All looked. Halt. Down she
sat. All ousted looked. Lips laughing. Yellow knees.

--_Charmed my eye_...

Singing. _Waiting_ she sang. I turned her music. Full voice of perfume
of what perfume does your lilactrees. Bosom I saw, both full, throat
warbling. First I saw. She thanked me. Why did she me? Fate. Spanishy
eyes. Under a peartree alone patio this hour in old Madrid one side in
shadow Dolores shedolores. At me. Luring. Ah, alluring.

--_Martha! Ah, Martha!_

Quitting all languor Lionel cried in grief, in cry of passion dominant
to love to return with deepening yet with rising chords of harmony. In
cry of lionel loneliness that she should know, must martha feel. For
only her he waited. Where? Here there try there here all try where.
Somewhere.

     --_Co-ome, thou lost one!
     Co-ome, thou dear one!_

Alone. One love. One hope. One comfort me. Martha, chestnote, return!

_--Come!_

It soared, a bird, it held its flight, a swift pure cry, soar silver orb
it leaped serene, speeding, sustained, to come, don't spin it out too
long long breath he breath long life, soaring high, high resplendent,
aflame, crowned, high in the effulgence symbolistic, high, of the
etherial bosom, high, of the high vast irradiation everywhere all
soaring all around about the all, the endlessnessnessness...

--_To me!_

Siopold!

Consumed.

Come. Well sung. All clapped. She ought to. Come. To me, to him, to her,
you too, me, us.

--Bravo! Clapclap. Good man, Simon. Clappyclapclap. Encore! Clapclipclap
clap. Sound as a bell. Bravo, Simon! Clapclopclap. Encore, enclap, said,
cried, clapped all, Ben Dollard, Lydia Douce, George Lidwell, Pat, Mina
Kennedy, two gentlemen with two tankards, Cowley, first gent with tank
and bronze miss Douce and gold MJiss Mina.

Blazes Boylan's smart tan shoes creaked on the barfloor, said before.
Jingle by monuments of sir John Gray, Horatio onehandled Nelson,
reverend father Theobald Mathew, jaunted, as said before just now.
Atrot, in heat, heatseated. _Cloche. Sonnez la. Cloche. Sonnez la._
Slower the mare went up the hill by the Rotunda, Rutland square. Too
slow for Boylan, blazes Boylan, impatience Boylan, joggled the mare.

An afterclang of Cowley's chords closed, died on the air made richer.

And Richie Goulding drank his Power and Leopold Bloom his cider drank,
Lidwell his Guinness, second gentleman said they would partake of two
more tankards if she did not mind. Miss Kennedy smirked, disserving,
coral lips, at first, at second. She did not mind.

--Seven days in jail, Ben Dollard said, on bread and water. Then you'd
sing, Simon, like a garden thrush.

Lionel Simon, singer, laughed. Father Bob Cowley played. Mina Kennedy
served. Second gentleman paid. Tom Kernan strutted in. Lydia, admired,
admired. But Bloom sang dumb.

Admiring.

Richie, admiring, descanted on that man's glorious voice. He remembered
one night long ago. Never forget that night. Si sang _'Twas rank and
fame_: in Ned Lambert's 'twas. Good God he never heard in all his life a
note like that he never did _then false one we had better part_ so clear
so God he never heard _since love lives not_ a clinking voice lives not
ask Lambert he can tell you too.

Goulding, a flush struggling in his pale, told Mr Bloom, face of the
night, Si in Ned Lambert's, Dedalus house, sang _'Twas rank and fame._

He, Mr Bloom, listened while he, Richie Goulding, told him, Mr Bloom, of
the night he, Richie, heard him, Si Dedalus, sing 'TWAS RANK AND FAME in
his, Ned Lambert's, house.

Brothers-in-law: relations. We never speak as we pass by. Rift in the
lute I think. Treats him with scorn. See. He admires him all the more.
The night Si sang. The human voice, two tiny silky chords, wonderful,
more than all others.

That voice was a lamentation. Calmer now. It's in the silence after you
feel you hear. Vibrations. Now silent air.

Bloom ungyved his crisscrossed hands and with slack fingers plucked the
slender catgut thong. He drew and plucked. It buzz, it twanged. While
Goulding talked of Barraclough's voice production, while Tom Kernan,
harking back in a retrospective sort of arrangement talked to listening
Father Cowley, who played a voluntary, who nodded as he played. While
big Ben Dollard talked with Simon Dedalus, lighting, who nodded as he
smoked, who smoked.

Thou lost one. All songs on that theme. Yet more Bloom stretched his
string. Cruel it seems. Let people get fond of each other: lure them on.
Then tear asunder. Death. Explos. Knock on the head. Outtohelloutofthat.
Human life. Dignam. Ugh, that rat's tail wriggling! Five bob I gave.
_Corpus paradisum._ Corncrake croaker: belly like a poisoned pup. Gone.
They sing. Forgotten. I too; And one day she with. Leave her: get
tired. Suffer then. Snivel. Big spanishy eyes goggling at nothing. Her
wavyavyeavyheavyeavyevyevyhair un comb:'d.

Yet too much happy bores. He stretched more, more. Are you not happy in
your? Twang. It snapped.

Jingle into Dorset street.

Miss Douce withdrew her satiny arm, reproachful, pleased.

--Don't make half so free, said she, till we are better acquainted.

George Lidwell told her really and truly: but she did not believe.

First gentleman told Mina that was so. She asked him was that so. And
second tankard told her so. That that was so.

Miss Douce, miss Lydia, did not believe: miss Kennedy, Mina, did not
believe: George Lidwell, no: miss Dou did not: the first, the first:
gent with the tank: believe, no, no: did not, miss Kenn: Lidlydiawell:
the tank.

Better write it here. Quills in the postoffice chewed and twisted.

Bald Pat at a sign drew nigh. A pen and ink. He went. A pad. He went. A
pad to blot. He heard, deaf Pat.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said, teasing the curling catgut line. It certainly is.
Few lines will do. My present. All that Italian florid music is. Who
is this wrote? Know the name you know better. Take out sheet notepaper,
envelope: unconcerned. It's so characteristic.

--Grandest number in the whole opera, Goulding said.

--It is, Bloom said.

Numbers it is. All music when you come to think. Two multiplied by two
divided by half is twice one. Vibrations: chords those are. One plus two
plus six is seven. Do anything you like with figures juggling. Always
find out this equal to that. Symmetry under a cemetery wall. He doesn't
see my mourning. Callous: all for his own gut. Musemathematics. And you
think you're listening to the etherial. But suppose you said it like:
Martha, seven times nine minus x is thirtyfive thousand. Fall quite
flat. It's on account of the sounds it is.

Instance he's playing now. Improvising. Might be what you like, till you
hear the words. Want to listen sharp. Hard. Begin all right: then hear
chords a bit off: feel lost a bit. In and out of sacks, over barrels,
through wirefences, obstacle race. Time makes the tune. Question of mood
you're in. Still always nice to hear. Except scales up and down, girls
learning. Two together nextdoor neighbours. Ought to invent dummy pianos
for that. _Blumenlied_ I bought for her. The name. Playing it slow,
a girl, night I came home, the girl. Door of the stables near Cecilia
street. Milly no taste. Queer because we both, I mean.

Bald deaf Pat brought quite flat pad ink. Pat set with ink pen quite
flat pad. Pat took plate dish knife fork. Pat went.

It was the only language Mr Dedalus said to Ben. He heard them as a
boy in Ringabella, Crosshaven, Ringabella, singing their barcaroles.
Queenstown harbour full of Italian ships. Walking, you know, Ben, in the
moonlight with those earthquake hats. Blending their voices. God, such
music, Ben. Heard as a boy. Cross Ringabella haven mooncarole.

Sour pipe removed he held a shield of hand beside his lips that cooed a
moonlight nightcall, clear from anear, a call from afar, replying.

Down the edge of his _Freeman_ baton ranged Bloom's, your other eye,
scanning for where did I see that. Callan, Coleman, Dignam Patrick.
Heigho! Heigho! Fawcett. Aha! Just I was looking...

Hope he's not looking, cute as a rat. He held unfurled his _Freeman._
Can't see now. Remember write Greek ees. Bloom dipped, Bloo mur: dear
sir. Dear Henry wrote: dear Mady. Got your lett and flow. Hell did I
put? Some pock or oth. It is utterl imposs. Underline _imposs._ To write
today.

Bore this. Bored Bloom tambourined gently with I am just reflecting
fingers on flat pad Pat brought.

On. Know what I mean. No, change that ee. Accep my poor litt pres
enclos. Ask her no answ. Hold on. Five Dig. Two about here. Penny the
gulls. Elijah is com. Seven Davy Byrne's. Is eight about. Say half a
crown. My poor little pres: p. o. two and six. Write me a long. Do you
despise? Jingle, have you the? So excited. Why do you call me naught?
You naughty too? O, Mairy lost the string of her. Bye for today. Yes,
yes, will tell you. Want to. To keep it up. Call me that other. Other
world she wrote. My patience are exhaust. To keep it up. You must
believe. Believe. The tank. It. Is. True.

Folly am I writing? Husbands don't. That's marriage does, their wives.
Because I'm away from. Suppose. But how? She must. Keep young. If she
found out. Card in my high grade ha. No, not tell all. Useless pain. If
they don't see. Woman. Sauce for the gander.

A hackney car, number three hundred and twentyfour, driver Barton James
of number one Harmony avenue, Donnybrook, on which sat a fare, a young
gentleman, stylishly dressed in an indigoblue serge suit made by George
Robert Mesias, tailor and cutter, of number five Eden quay, and wearing
a straw hat very dressy, bought of John Plasto of number one Great
Brunswick street, hatter. Eh? This is the jingle that joggled and
jingled. By Dlugacz' porkshop bright tubes of Agendath trotted a
gallantbuttocked mare.

--Answering an ad? keen Richie's eyes asked Bloom.

--Yes, Mr Bloom said. Town traveller. Nothing doing, I expect.

Bloom mur: best references. But Henry wrote: it will excite me. You
know how. In haste. Henry. Greek ee. Better add postscript. What is he
playing now? Improvising. Intermezzo. P. S. The rum tum tum. How will
you pun? You punish me? Crooked skirt swinging, whack by. Tell me I want
to. Know. O. Course if I didn't I wouldn't ask. La la la ree. Trails off
there sad in minor. Why minor sad? Sign H. They like sad tail at end. P.
P. S. La la la ree. I feel so sad today. La ree. So lonely. Dee.

He blotted quick on pad of Pat. Envel. Address. Just copy out of paper.
Murmured: Messrs Callan, Coleman and Co, limited. Henry wrote:

Miss Martha Clifford c/o P. O. Dolphin's Barn Lane Dublin

Blot over the other so he can't read. There. Right. Idea prize titbit.
Something detective read off blottingpad. Payment at the rate of guinea
per col. Matcham often thinks the laughing witch. Poor Mrs Purefoy. U.
P: up.

Too poetical that about the sad. Music did that. Music hath charms.
Shakespeare said. Quotations every day in the year. To be or not to be.
Wisdom while you wait.

In Gerard's rosery of Fetter lane he walks, greyedauburn. One life is
all. One body. Do. But do.

Done anyhow. Postal order, stamp. Postoffice lower down. Walk now.
Enough. Barney Kiernan's I promised to meet them. Dislike that job.

House of mourning. Walk. Pat! Doesn't hear. Deaf beetle he is.

Car near there now. Talk. Talk. Pat! Doesn't. Settling those napkins.
Lot of ground he must cover in the day. Paint face behind on him then
he'd be two. Wish they'd sing more. Keep my mind off.

Bald Pat who is bothered mitred the napkins. Pat is a waiter hard of his
hearing. Pat is a waiter who waits while you wait. Hee hee hee hee. He
waits while you wait. Hee hee. A waiter is he. Hee hee hee hee. He waits
while you wait. While you wait if you wait he will wait while you wait.
Hee hee hee hee. Hoh. Wait while you wait.

Douce now. Douce Lydia. Bronze and rose.

She had a gorgeous, simply gorgeous, time. And look at the lovely shell
she brought.

To the end of the bar to him she bore lightly the spiked and winding
seahorn that he, George Lidwell, solicitor, might hear.

--Listen! she bade him.

Under Tom Kernan's ginhot words the accompanist wove music slow.
Authentic fact. How Walter Bapty lost his voice. Well, sir, the husband
took him by the throat. _Scoundrel,_ said he, _You'll sing no more
lovesongs._ He did, faith, sir Tom. Bob Cowley wove. Tenors get wom.
Cowley lay back.

Ah, now he heard, she holding it to his ear. Hear! He heard.

Wonderful. She held it to her own. And through the sifted light pale
gold in contrast glided. To hear.

Tap.

Bloom through the bardoor saw a shell held at their ears. He heard more
faintly that that they heard, each for herself alone, then each for
other, hearing the plash of waves, loudly, a silent roar.

Bronze by a weary gold, anear, afar, they listened.

Her ear too is a shell, the peeping lobe there. Been to the seaside.
Lovely seaside girls. Skin tanned raw. Should have put on coldcream
first make it brown. Buttered toast. O and that lotion mustn't forget.
Fever near her mouth. Your head it simply. Hair braided over: shell with
seaweed. Why do they hide their ears with seaweed hair? And Turks the
mouth, why? Her eyes over the sheet. Yashmak. Find the way in. A cave.
No admittance except on business.

The sea they think they hear. Singing. A roar. The blood it is. Souse in
the ear sometimes. Well, it's a sea. Corpuscle islands.

Wonderful really. So distinct. Again. George Lidwell held its murmur,
hearing: then laid it by, gently.

--What are the wild waves saying? he asked her, smiled.

Charming, seasmiling and unanswering Lydia on Lidwell smiled.

Tap.

By Larry O'Rourke's, by Larry, bold Larry O', Boylan swayed and Boylan
turned.

From the forsaken shell miss Mina glided to her tankards waiting. No,
she was not so lonely archly miss Douce's head let Mr Lidwell know.
Walks in the moonlight by the sea. No, not alone. With whom? She nobly
answered: with a gentleman friend.

Bob Cowley's twinkling fingers in the treble played again. The landlord
has the prior. A little time. Long John. Big Ben. Lightly he played a
light bright tinkling measure for tripping ladies, arch and smiling,
and for their gallants, gentlemen friends. One: one, one, one, one, one:
two, one, three, four.

Sea, wind, leaves, thunder, waters, cows lowing, the cattlemarket,
cocks, hens don't crow, snakes hissss. There's music everywhere.
Ruttledge's door: ee creaking. No, that's noise. Minuet of _Don
Giovanni_ he's playing now. Court dresses of all descriptions in castle
chambers dancing. Misery. Peasants outside. Green starving faces eating
dockleaves. Nice that is. Look: look, look, look, look, look: you look
at us.

That's joyful I can feel. Never have written it. Why? My joy is other
joy. But both are joys. Yes, joy it must be. Mere fact of music shows
you are. Often thought she was in the dumps till she began to lilt. Then
know.

M'Coy valise. My wife and your wife. Squealing cat. Like tearing silk.
Tongue when she talks like the clapper of a bellows. They can't manage
men's intervals. Gap in their voices too. Fill me. I'm warm, dark, open.
Molly in _quis est homo_: Mercadante. My ear against the wall to hear.
Want a woman who can deliver the goods.

Jog jig jogged stopped. Dandy tan shoe of dandy Boylan socks skyblue
clocks came light to earth.

O, look we are so! Chamber music. Could make a kind of pun on that.
It is a kind of music I often thought when she. Acoustics that is.
Tinkling. Empty vessels make most noise. Because the acoustics, the
resonance changes according as the weight of the water is equal to
the law of falling water. Like those rhapsodies of Liszt's, Hungarian,
gipsyeyed. Pearls. Drops. Rain. Diddleiddle addleaddle ooddleooddle.
Hissss. Now. Maybe now. Before.

One rapped on a door, one tapped with a knock, did he knock Paul de Kock
with a loud proud knocker with a cock carracarracarra cock. Cockcock.

Tap.

--_Qui sdegno,_ Ben, said Father Cowley.

--No, Ben, Tom Kernan interfered. _The Croppy Boy._ Our native Doric.

--Ay do, Ben, Mr Dedalus said. Good men and true.

--Do, do, they begged in one.

I'll go. Here, Pat, return. Come. He came, he came, he did not stay. To
me. How much?

--What key? Six sharps?

--F sharp major, Ben Dollard said.

Bob Cowley's outstretched talons griped the black deepsounding chords.

Must go prince Bloom told Richie prince. No, Richie said. Yes, must. Got
money somewhere. He's on for a razzle backache spree. Much? He seehears
lipspeech. One and nine. Penny for yourself. Here. Give him twopence
tip. Deaf, bothered. But perhaps he has wife and family waiting, waiting
Patty come home. Hee hee hee hee. Deaf wait while they wait.

But wait. But hear. Chords dark. Lugugugubrious. Low. In a cave of the
dark middle earth. Embedded ore. Lumpmusic.

The voice of dark age, of unlove, earth's fatigue made grave approach
and painful, come from afar, from hoary mountains, called on good men
and true. The priest he sought. With him would he speak a word.

Tap.

Ben Dollard's voice. Base barreltone. Doing his level best to say it.
Croak of vast manless moonless womoonless marsh. Other comedown. Big
ships' chandler's business he did once. Remember: rosiny ropes, ships'
lanterns. Failed to the tune of ten thousand pounds. Now in the Iveagh
home. Cubicle number so and so. Number one Bass did that for him.

The priest's at home. A false priest's servant bade him welcome. Step
in. The holy father. With bows a traitor servant. Curlycues of chords.

Ruin them. Wreck their lives. Then build them cubicles to end their days
in. Hushaby. Lullaby. Die, dog. Little dog, die.

The voice of warning, solemn warning, told them the youth had entered
a lonely hall, told them how solemn fell his footsteps there, told them
the gloomy chamber, the vested priest sitting to shrive.

Decent soul. Bit addled now. Thinks he'll win in _Answers,_ poets'
picture puzzle. We hand you crisp five pound note. Bird sitting hatching
in a nest. Lay of the last minstrel he thought it was. See blank tee
what domestic animal? Tee dash ar most courageous mariner. Good voice he
has still. No eunuch yet with all his belongings.

Listen. Bloom listened. Richie Goulding listened. And by the door deaf
Pat, bald Pat, tipped Pat, listened. The chords harped slower.

The voice of penance and of grief came slow, embellished, tremulous.
Ben's contrite beard confessed. _in nomine Domini,_ in God's name he
knelt. He beat his hand upon his breast, confessing: _mea culpa._

Latin again. That holds them like birdlime. Priest with the communion
corpus for those women. Chap in the mortuary, coffin or coffey,
_corpusnomine._ Wonder where that rat is by now. Scrape.

Tap.

They listened. Tankards and miss Kennedy. George Lidwell, eyelid well
expressive, fullbusted satin. Kernan. Si.

The sighing voice of sorrow sang. His sins. Since Easter he had cursed
three times. You bitch's bast. And once at masstime he had gone to play.
Once by the churchyard he had passed and for his mother's rest he had
not prayed. A boy. A croppy boy.

Bronze, listening, by the beerpull gazed far away. Soulfully. Doesn't
half know I'm. Molly great dab at seeing anyone looking.

Bronze gazed far sideways. Mirror there. Is that best side of her face?
They always know. Knock at the door. Last tip to titivate.

Cockcarracarra.

What do they think when they hear music? Way to catch rattlesnakes.
Night Michael Gunn gave us the box. Tuning up. Shah of Persia liked
that best. Remind him of home sweet home. Wiped his nose in curtain too.
Custom his country perhaps. That's music too. Not as bad as it sounds.
Tootling. Brasses braying asses through uptrunks. Doublebasses helpless,
gashes in their sides. Woodwinds mooing cows. Semigrand open crocodile
music hath jaws. Woodwind like Goodwin's name.

She looked fine. Her crocus dress she wore lowcut, belongings on show.
Clove her breath was always in theatre when she bent to ask a question.
Told her what Spinoza says in that book of poor papa's. Hypnotised,
listening. Eyes like that. She bent. Chap in dresscircle staring down
into her with his operaglass for all he was worth. Beauty of music you
must hear twice. Nature woman half a look. God made the country man the
tune. Met him pike hoses. Philosophy. O rocks!

All gone. All fallen. At the siege of Ross his father, at Gorey all his
brothers fell. To Wexford, we are the boys of Wexford, he would. Last of
his name and race.

I too. Last of my race. Milly young student. Well, my fault perhaps. No
son. Rudy. Too late now. Or if not? If not? If still?

He bore no hate.

Hate. Love. Those are names. Rudy. Soon I am old. Big Ben his voice
unfolded. Great voice Richie Goulding said, a flush struggling in his
pale, to Bloom soon old. But when was young?

Ireland comes now. My country above the king. She listens. Who fears to
speak of nineteen four? Time to be shoving. Looked enough.

--_Bless me, father,_ Dollard the croppy cried. _Bless me and let me
go._

Tap.

Bloom looked, unblessed to go. Got up to kill: on eighteen bob a week.
Fellows shell out the dibs. Want to keep your weathereye open. Those
girls, those lovely. By the sad sea waves. Chorusgirl's romance. Letters
read out for breach of promise. From Chickabiddy's owny Mumpsypum.
Laughter in court. Henry. I never signed it. The lovely name you.

Low sank the music, air and words. Then hastened. The false priest
rustling soldier from his cassock. A yeoman captain. They know it all by
heart. The thrill they itch for. Yeoman cap.

Tap. Tap.

Thrilled she listened, bending in sympathy to hear.

Blank face. Virgin should say: or fingered only. Write something on it:
page. If not what becomes of them? Decline, despair. Keeps them young.
Even admire themselves. See. Play on her. Lip blow. Body of white woman,
a flute alive. Blow gentle. Loud. Three holes, all women. Goddess I
didn't see. They want it. Not too much polite. That's why he gets them.
Gold in your pocket, brass in your face. Say something. Make her hear.
With look to look. Songs without words. Molly, that hurdygurdy boy.
She knew he meant the monkey was sick. Or because so like the Spanish.
Understand animals too that way. Solomon did. Gift of nature.

Ventriloquise. My lips closed. Think in my stom. What?

Will? You? I. Want. You. To.

With hoarse rude fury the yeoman cursed, swelling in apoplectic bitch's
bastard. A good thought, boy, to come. One hour's your time to live,
your last.

Tap. Tap.

Thrill now. Pity they feel. To wipe away a tear for martyrs that want
to, dying to, die. For all things dying, for all things born. Poor Mrs
Purefoy. Hope she's over. Because their wombs.

A liquid of womb of woman eyeball gazed under a fence of lashes, calmly,
hearing. See real beauty of the eye when she not speaks. On yonder
river. At each slow satiny heaving bosom's wave (her heaving embon) red
rose rose slowly sank red rose. Heartbeats: her breath: breath that is
life. And all the tiny tiny fernfoils trembled of maidenhair.

But look. The bright stars fade. O rose! Castile. The morn. Ha. Lidwell.
For him then not for. Infatuated. I like that? See her from here though.
Popped corks, splashes of beerfroth, stacks of empties.

On the smooth jutting beerpull laid Lydia hand, lightly, plumply, leave
it to my hands. All lost in pity for croppy. Fro, to: to, fro: over
the polished knob (she knows his eyes, my eyes, her eyes) her thumb and
finger passed in pity: passed, reposed and, gently touching, then slid
so smoothly, slowly down, a cool firm white enamel baton protruding
through their sliding ring.

With a cock with a carra.

Tap. Tap. Tap.

I hold this house. Amen. He gnashed in fury. Traitors swing.

The chords consented. Very sad thing. But had to be. Get out before the
end. Thanks, that was heavenly. Where's my hat. Pass by her. Can leave
that Freeman. Letter I have. Suppose she were the? No. Walk, walk,
walk. Like Cashel Boylo Connoro Coylo Tisdall Maurice Tisntdall Farrell.
Waaaaaaalk.

Well, I must be. Are you off? Yrfmstbyes. Blmstup. O'er ryehigh blue.
Ow. Bloom stood up. Soap feeling rather sticky behind. Must have
sweated: music. That lotion, remember. Well, so long. High grade. Card
inside. Yes.

By deaf Pat in the doorway straining ear Bloom passed.

At Geneva barrack that young man died. At Passage was his body laid.
Dolor! O, he dolores! The voice of the mournful chanter called to
dolorous prayer.

By rose, by satiny bosom, by the fondling hand, by slops, by empties,
by popped corks, greeting in going, past eyes and maidenhair, bronze and
faint gold in deepseashadow, went Bloom, soft Bloom, I feel so lonely
Bloom.

Tap. Tap. Tap.

Pray for him, prayed the bass of Dollard. You who hear in peace. Breathe
a prayer, drop a tear, good men, good people. He was the croppy boy.

Scaring eavesdropping boots croppy bootsboy Bloom in the Ormond hallway
heard the growls and roars of bravo, fat backslapping, their boots all
treading, boots not the boots the boy. General chorus off for a swill to
wash it down. Glad I avoided.

--Come on, Ben, Simon Dedalus cried. By God, you're as good as ever you
were.

--Better, said Tomgin Kernan. Most trenchant rendition of that ballad,
upon my soul and honour It is.

--Lablache, said Father Cowley.

Ben Dollard bulkily cachuchad towards the bar, mightily praisefed
and all big roseate, on heavyfooted feet, his gouty fingers nakkering
castagnettes in the air.

Big Benaben Dollard. Big Benben. Big Benben.

Rrr.

And deepmoved all, Simon trumping compassion from foghorn nose, all
laughing they brought him forth, Ben Dollard, in right good cheer.

--You're looking rubicund, George Lidwell said.

Miss Douce composed her rose to wait.

--Ben machree, said Mr Dedalus, clapping Ben's fat back shoulderblade.
Fit as a fiddle only he has a lot of adipose tissue concealed about his
person.

Rrrrrrrsss.

--Fat of death, Simon, Ben Dollard growled.

Richie rift in the lute alone sat: Goulding, Collis, Ward. Uncertainly
he waited. Unpaid Pat too.

Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap.

Miss Mina Kennedy brought near her lips to ear of tankard one.

--Mr Dollard, they murmured low.

--Dollard, murmured tankard.

Tank one believed: miss Kenn when she: that doll he was: she doll: the
tank.

He murmured that he knew the name. The name was familiar to him, that
is to say. That was to say he had heard the name of. Dollard, was it?
Dollard, yes.

Yes, her lips said more loudly, Mr Dollard. He sang that song lovely,
murmured Mina. Mr Dollard. And _The last rose of summer_ was a lovely
song. Mina loved that song. Tankard loved the song that Mina.

'Tis the last rose of summer dollard left bloom felt wind wound round
inside.

Gassy thing that cider: binding too. Wait. Postoffice near Reuben J's
one and eightpence too. Get shut of it. Dodge round by Greek street.
Wish I hadn't promised to meet. Freer in air. Music. Gets on your
nerves. Beerpull. Her hand that rocks the cradle rules the. Ben Howth.
That rules the world.

Far. Far. Far. Far.

Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap.

Up the quay went Lionelleopold, naughty Henry with letter for Mady, with
sweets of sin with frillies for Raoul with met him pike hoses went Poldy
on.

Tap blind walked tapping by the tap the curbstone tapping, tap by tap.

Cowley, he stuns himself with it: kind of drunkenness. Better give way
only half way the way of a man with a maid. Instance enthusiasts. All
ears. Not lose a demisemiquaver. Eyes shut. Head nodding in time. Dotty.
You daren't budge. Thinking strictly prohibited. Always talking shop.
Fiddlefaddle about notes.

All a kind of attempt to talk. Unpleasant when it stops because you
never know exac. Organ in Gardiner street. Old Glynn fifty quid a year.
Queer up there in the cockloft, alone, with stops and locks and keys.
Seated all day at the organ. Maunder on for hours, talking to himself or
the other fellow blowing the bellows. Growl angry, then shriek cursing
(want to have wadding or something in his no don't she cried), then all
of a soft sudden wee little wee little pipy wind.

Pwee! A wee little wind piped eeee. In Bloom's little wee.

--Was he? Mr Dedalus said, returning with fetched pipe. I was with him
this morning at poor little Paddy Dignam's...

--Ay, the Lord have mercy on him.

--By the bye there's a tuningfork in there on the...

Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap.

--The wife has a fine voice. Or had. What? Lidwell asked.

--O, that must be the tuner, Lydia said to Simonlionel first I saw,
forgot it when he was here.

Blind he was she told George Lidwell second I saw. And played so
exquisitely, treat to hear. Exquisite contrast: bronzelid, minagold.

--Shout! Ben Dollard shouted, pouring. Sing out!

--'lldo! cried Father Cowley.

Rrrrrr.

I feel I want...

Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap

--Very, Mr Dedalus said, staring hard at a headless sardine.

Under the sandwichbell lay on a bier of bread one last, one lonely, last
sardine of summer. Bloom alone.

--Very, he stared. The lower register, for choice.

Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap. Tap.

Bloom went by Barry's. Wish I could. Wait. That wonderworker if I had.
Twentyfour solicitors in that one house. Counted them. Litigation. Love
one another. Piles of parchment. Messrs Pick and Pocket have power of
attorney. Goulding, Collis, Ward.

But for example the chap that wallops the big drum. His vocation: Mickey
Rooney's band. Wonder how it first struck him. Sitting at home after
pig's cheek and cabbage nursing it in the armchair. Rehearsing his band
part. Pom. Pompedy. Jolly for the wife. Asses' skins. Welt them through
life, then wallop after death. Pom. Wallop. Seems to be what you call
yashmak or I mean kismet. Fate.

Tap. Tap. A stripling, blind, with a tapping cane came taptaptapping by
Daly's window where a mermaid hair all streaming (but he couldn't see)
blew whiffs of a mermaid (blind couldn't), mermaid, coolest whiff of
all.

Instruments. A blade of grass, shell of her hands, then blow. Even
comb and tissuepaper you can knock a tune out of. Molly in her shift in
Lombard street west, hair down. I suppose each kind of trade made its
own, don't you see? Hunter with a horn. Haw. Have you the? _Cloche.
Sonnez la._ Shepherd his pipe. Pwee little wee. Policeman a whistle.
Locks and keys! Sweep! Four o'clock's all's well! Sleep! All is lost
now. Drum? Pompedy. Wait. I know. Towncrier, bumbailiff. Long John.
Waken the dead. Pom. Dignam. Poor little _nominedomine._ Pom. It is
music. I mean of course it's all pom pom pom very much what they call
_da capo._ Still you can hear. As we march, we march along, march along.
Pom.

I must really. Fff. Now if I did that at a banquet. Just a question of
custom shah of Persia. Breathe a prayer, drop a tear. All the same
he must have been a bit of a natural not to see it was a yeoman cap.
Muffled up. Wonder who was that chap at the grave in the brown macin. O,
the whore of the lane!

A frowsy whore with black straw sailor hat askew came glazily in the day
along the quay towards Mr Bloom. When first he saw that form endearing?
Yes, it is. I feel so lonely. Wet night in the lane. Horn. Who had
the? Heehaw shesaw. Off her beat here. What is she? Hope she. Psst! Any
chance of your wash. Knew Molly. Had me decked. Stout lady does be with
you in the brown costume. Put you off your stroke, that. Appointment
we made knowing we'd never, well hardly ever. Too dear too near to home
sweet home. Sees me, does she? Looks a fright in the day. Face like dip.
Damn her. O, well, she has to live like the rest. Look in here.

In Lionel Marks's antique saleshop window haughty Henry Lionel Leopold
dear Henry Flower earnestly Mr Leopold Bloom envisaged battered
candlesticks melodeon oozing maggoty blowbags. Bargain: six bob. Might
learn to play. Cheap. Let her pass. Course everything is dear if you
don't want it. That's what good salesman is. Make you buy what he wants
to sell. Chap sold me the Swedish razor he shaved me with. Wanted to
charge me for the edge he gave it. She's passing now. Six bob.

Must be the cider or perhaps the burgund.

Near bronze from anear near gold from afar they chinked their clinking
glasses all, brighteyed and gallant, before bronze Lydia's tempting last
rose of summer, rose of Castile. First Lid, De, Cow, Ker, Doll, a fifth:
Lidwell, Si Dedalus, Bob Cowley, Kernan and big Ben Dollard.

Tap. A youth entered a lonely Ormond hall.

Bloom viewed a gallant pictured hero in Lionel Marks's window. Robert
Emmet's last words. Seven last words. Of Meyerbeer that is.

--True men like you men.

--Ay, ay, Ben.

--Will lift your glass with us.

They lifted.

Tschink. Tschunk.

Tip. An unseeing stripling stood in the door. He saw not bronze. He saw
not gold. Nor Ben nor Bob nor Tom nor Si nor George nor tanks nor Richie
nor Pat. Hee hee hee hee. He did not see.

Seabloom, greaseabloom viewed last words. Softly. _When my country takes
her place among._

Prrprr.

Must be the bur.

Fff! Oo. Rrpr.

_Nations of the earth._ No-one behind. She's passed. _Then and not till
then._ Tram kran kran kran. Good oppor. Coming. Krandlkrankran. I'm
sure it's the burgund. Yes. One, two. _Let my epitaph be._ Kraaaaaa.
_Written. I have._

Pprrpffrrppffff.

_Done._



I was just passing the time of day with old Troy of the D. M. P. at the
corner of Arbour hill there and be damned but a bloody sweep came along
and he near drove his gear into my eye. I turned around to let him have
the weight of my tongue when who should I see dodging along Stony Batter
only Joe Hynes.

--Lo, Joe, says I. How are you blowing? Did you see that bloody
chimneysweep near shove my eye out with his brush?

--Soot's luck, says Joe. Who's the old ballocks you were talking to?

--Old Troy, says I, was in the force. I'm on two minds not to give that
fellow in charge for obstructing the thoroughfare with his brooms and
ladders.

--What are you doing round those parts? says Joe.

--Devil a much, says I. There's a bloody big foxy thief beyond by the
garrison church at the corner of Chicken lane--old Troy was just giving
me a wrinkle about him--lifted any God's quantity of tea and sugar
to pay three bob a week said he had a farm in the county Down off a
hop-of-my-thumb by the name of Moses Herzog over there near Heytesbury
street.

--Circumcised? says Joe.

--Ay, says I. A bit off the top. An old plumber named Geraghty. I'm
hanging on to his taw now for the past fortnight and I can't get a penny
out of him.

--That the lay you're on now? says Joe.

--Ay, says I. How are the mighty fallen! Collector of bad and doubtful
debts. But that's the most notorious bloody robber you'd meet in a day's
walk and the face on him all pockmarks would hold a shower of rain.
_Tell him,_ says he, _I dare him,_ says he, _and I doubledare him
to send you round here again or if he does,_ says he, _I'll have
him summonsed up before the court, so I will, for trading without a
licence._ And he after stuffing himself till he's fit to burst. Jesus,
I had to laugh at the little jewy getting his shirt out. _He drink me my
teas. He eat me my sugars. Because he no pay me my moneys?_

For nonperishable goods bought of Moses Herzog, of 13 Saint Kevin's
parade in the city of Dublin, Wood quay ward, merchant, hereinafter
called the vendor, and sold and delivered to Michael E. Geraghty,
esquire, of 29 Arbour hill in the city of Dublin, Arran quay ward,
gentleman, hereinafter called the purchaser, videlicet, five pounds
avoirdupois of first choice tea at three shillings and no pence per
pound avoirdupois and three stone avoirdupois of sugar, crushed crystal,
at threepence per pound avoirdupois, the said purchaser debtor to the
said vendor of one pound five shillings and sixpence sterling for value
received which amount shall be paid by said purchaser to said vendor in
weekly instalments every seven calendar days of three shillings and no
pence sterling: and the said nonperishable goods shall not be pawned or
pledged or sold or otherwise alienated by the said purchaser but shall
be and remain and be held to be the sole and exclusive property of the
said vendor to be disposed of at his good will and pleasure until the
said amount shall have been duly paid by the said purchaser to the said
vendor in the manner herein set forth as this day hereby agreed between
the said vendor, his heirs, successors, trustees and assigns of the one
part and the said purchaser, his heirs, successors, trustees and assigns
of the other part.

--Are you a strict t.t.? says Joe.

--Not taking anything between drinks, says I.

--What about paying our respects to our friend? says Joe.

--Who? says I. Sure, he's out in John of God's off his head, poor man.

--Drinking his own stuff? says Joe.

--Ay, says I. Whisky and water on the brain.

--Come around to Barney Kiernan's, says Joe. I want to see the citizen.

--Barney mavourneen's be it, says I. Anything strange or wonderful, Joe?

--Not a word, says Joe. I was up at that meeting in the City Arms.

---What was that, Joe? says I.

--Cattle traders, says Joe, about the foot and mouth disease. I want to
give the citizen the hard word about it.

So we went around by the Linenhall barracks and the back of the
courthouse talking of one thing or another. Decent fellow Joe when he
has it but sure like that he never has it. Jesus, I couldn't get over
that bloody foxy Geraghty, the daylight robber. For trading without a
licence, says he.

In Inisfail the fair there lies a land, the land of holy Michan. There
rises a watchtower beheld of men afar. There sleep the mighty dead as in
life they slept, warriors and princes of high renown. A pleasant land
it is in sooth of murmuring waters, fishful streams where sport the
gurnard, the plaice, the roach, the halibut, the gibbed haddock, the
grilse, the dab, the brill, the flounder, the pollock, the mixed coarse
fish generally and other denizens of the aqueous kingdom too numerous to
be enumerated. In the mild breezes of the west and of the east the lofty
trees wave in different directions their firstclass foliage, the wafty
sycamore, the Lebanonian cedar, the exalted planetree, the eugenic
eucalyptus and other ornaments of the arboreal world with which
that region is thoroughly well supplied. Lovely maidens sit in close
proximity to the roots of the lovely trees singing the most lovely songs
while they play with all kinds of lovely objects as for example golden
ingots, silvery fishes, crans of herrings, drafts of eels, codlings,
creels of fingerlings, purple seagems and playful insects. And heroes
voyage from afar to woo them, from Eblana to Slievemargy, the peerless
princes of unfettered Munster and of Connacht the just and of smooth
sleek Leinster and of Cruahan's land and of Armagh the splendid and of
the noble district of Boyle, princes, the sons of kings.

And there rises a shining palace whose crystal glittering roof is seen
by mariners who traverse the extensive sea in barks built expressly for
that purpose, and thither come all herds and fatlings and firstfruits
of that land for O'Connell Fitzsimon takes toll of them, a chieftain
descended from chieftains. Thither the extremely large wains bring
foison of the fields, flaskets of cauliflowers, floats of spinach,
pineapple chunks, Rangoon beans, strikes of tomatoes, drums of figs,
drills of Swedes, spherical potatoes and tallies of iridescent kale,
York and Savoy, and trays of onions, pearls of the earth, and punnets of
mushrooms and custard marrows and fat vetches and bere and rape and red
green yellow brown russet sweet big bitter ripe pomellated apples and
chips of strawberries and sieves of gooseberries, pulpy and pelurious,
and strawberries fit for princes and raspberries from their canes.

I dare him, says he, and I doubledare him. Come out here, Geraghty, you
notorious bloody hill and dale robber!

And by that way wend the herds innumerable of bellwethers and flushed
ewes and shearling rams and lambs and stubble geese and medium steers
and roaring mares and polled calves and longwoods and storesheep and
Cuffe's prime springers and culls and sowpigs and baconhogs and the
various different varieties of highly distinguished swine and Angus
heifers and polly bulllocks of immaculate pedigree together with prime
premiated milchcows and beeves: and there is ever heard a trampling,
cackling, roaring, lowing, bleating, bellowing, rumbling, grunting,
champing, chewing, of sheep and pigs and heavyhooved kine from
pasturelands of Lusk and Rush and Carrickmines and from the streamy
vales of Thomond, from the M'Gillicuddy's reeks the inaccessible and
lordly Shannon the unfathomable, and from the gentle declivities of the
place of the race of Kiar, their udders distended with superabundance of
milk and butts of butter and rennets of cheese and farmer's firkins and
targets of lamb and crannocks of corn and oblong eggs in great hundreds,
various in size, the agate with this dun.

So we turned into Barney Kiernan's and there, sure enough, was the
citizen up in the corner having a great confab with himself and that
bloody mangy mongrel, Garryowen, and he waiting for what the sky would
drop in the way of drink.

--There he is, says I, in his gloryhole, with his cruiskeen lawn and his
load of papers, working for the cause.

The bloody mongrel let a grouse out of him would give you the creeps. Be
a corporal work of mercy if someone would take the life of that bloody
dog. I'm told for a fact he ate a good part of the breeches off a
constabulary man in Santry that came round one time with a blue paper
about a licence.

--Stand and deliver, says he.

--That's all right, citizen, says Joe. Friends here.

--Pass, friends, says he.

Then he rubs his hand in his eye and says he:

--What's your opinion of the times?

Doing the rapparee and Rory of the hill. But, begob, Joe was equal to
the occasion.

--I think the markets are on a rise, says he, sliding his hand down his
fork.

So begob the citizen claps his paw on his knee and he says:

--Foreign wars is the cause of it.

And says Joe, sticking his thumb in his pocket:

--It's the Russians wish to tyrannise.

--Arrah, give over your bloody codding, Joe, says I. I've a thirst on me
I wouldn't sell for half a crown.

--Give it a name, citizen, says Joe.

--Wine of the country, says he.

--What's yours? says Joe.

--Ditto MacAnaspey, says I.

--Three pints, Terry, says Joe. And how's the old heart, citizen? says
he.

--Never better, _a chara_, says he. What Garry? Are we going to win? Eh?

And with that he took the bloody old towser by the scruff of the neck
and, by Jesus, he near throttled him.

The figure seated on a large boulder at the foot of a round tower was
that of a broadshouldered deepchested stronglimbed frankeyed redhaired
freelyfreckled shaggybearded widemouthed largenosed longheaded
deepvoiced barekneed brawnyhanded hairylegged ruddyfaced sinewyarmed
hero. From shoulder to shoulder he measured several ells and his
rocklike mountainous knees were covered, as was likewise the rest of his
body wherever visible, with a strong growth of tawny prickly hair in
hue and toughness similar to the mountain gorse (_Ulex Europeus_).
The widewinged nostrils, from which bristles of the same tawny hue
projected, were of such capaciousness that within their cavernous
obscurity the fieldlark might easily have lodged her nest. The eyes
in which a tear and a smile strove ever for the mastery were of the
dimensions of a goodsized cauliflower. A powerful current of warm breath
issued at regular intervals from the profound cavity of his mouth
while in rhythmic resonance the loud strong hale reverberations of his
formidable heart thundered rumblingly causing the ground, the summit of
the lofty tower and the still loftier walls of the cave to vibrate and
tremble.

He wore a long unsleeved garment of recently flayed oxhide reaching
to the knees in a loose kilt and this was bound about his middle by
a girdle of plaited straw and rushes. Beneath this he wore trews of
deerskin, roughly stitched with gut. His nether extremities were encased
in high Balbriggan buskins dyed in lichen purple, the feet being shod
with brogues of salted cowhide laced with the windpipe of the same
beast. From his girdle hung a row of seastones which jangled at every
movement of his portentous frame and on these were graven with rude
yet striking art the tribal images of many Irish heroes and heroines of
antiquity, Cuchulin, Conn of hundred battles, Niall of nine hostages,
Brian of Kincora, the ardri Malachi, Art MacMurragh, Shane O'Neill,
Father John Murphy, Owen Roe, Patrick Sarsfield, Red Hugh O'Donnell,
Red Jim MacDermott, Soggarth Eoghan O'Growney, Michael Dwyer, Francy
Higgins, Henry Joy M'Cracken, Goliath, Horace Wheatley, Thomas Conneff,
Peg Woffington, the Village Blacksmith, Captain Moonlight, Captain
Boycott, Dante Alighieri, Christopher Columbus, S. Fursa, S. Brendan,
Marshal MacMahon, Charlemagne, Theobald Wolfe Tone, the Mother of the
Maccabees, the Last of the Mohicans, the Rose of Castile, the Man for
Galway, The Man that Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo, The Man in the Gap,
The Woman Who Didn't, Benjamin Franklin, Napoleon Bonaparte, John L.
Sullivan, Cleopatra, Savourneen Deelish, Julius Caesar, Paracelsus, sir
Thomas Lipton, William Tell, Michelangelo Hayes, Muhammad, the Bride of
Lammermoor, Peter the Hermit, Peter the Packer, Dark Rosaleen, Patrick
W. Shakespeare, Brian Confucius, Murtagh Gutenberg, Patricio Velasquez,
Captain Nemo, Tristan and Isolde, the first Prince of Wales, Thomas
Cook and Son, the Bold Soldier Boy, Arrah na Pogue, Dick Turpin, Ludwig
Beethoven, the Colleen Bawn, Waddler Healy, Angus the Culdee, Dolly
Mount, Sidney Parade, Ben Howth, Valentine Greatrakes, Adam and Eve,
Arthur Wellesley, Boss Croker, Herodotus, Jack the Giantkiller, Gautama
Buddha, Lady Godiva, The Lily of Killarney, Balor of the Evil Eye,
the Queen of Sheba, Acky Nagle, Joe Nagle, Alessandro Volta, Jeremiah
O'Donovan Rossa, Don Philip O'Sullivan Beare. A couched spear of
acuminated granite rested by him while at his feet reposed a savage
animal of the canine tribe whose stertorous gasps announced that he was
sunk in uneasy slumber, a supposition confirmed by hoarse growls and
spasmodic movements which his master repressed from time to time
by tranquilising blows of a mighty cudgel rudely fashioned out of
paleolithic stone.

So anyhow Terry brought the three pints Joe was standing and begob the
sight nearly left my eyes when I saw him land out a quid O, as true as
I'm telling you. A goodlooking sovereign.

--And there's more where that came from, says he.

--Were you robbing the poorbox, Joe? says I.

--Sweat of my brow, says Joe. 'Twas the prudent member gave me the
wheeze.

--I saw him before I met you, says I, sloping around by Pill lane and
Greek street with his cod's eye counting up all the guts of the fish.

Who comes through Michan's land, bedight in sable armour? O'Bloom,
the son of Rory: it is he. Impervious to fear is Rory's son: he of the
prudent soul.

--For the old woman of Prince's street, says the citizen, the subsidised
organ. The pledgebound party on the floor of the house. And look at this
blasted rag, says he. Look at this, says he. _The Irish Independent,_ if
you please, founded by Parnell to be the workingman's friend. Listen to
the births and deaths in the _Irish all for Ireland Independent,_ and
I'll thank you and the marriages.

And he starts reading them out:

--Gordon, Barnfield crescent, Exeter; Redmayne of Iffley, Saint Anne's
on Sea: the wife of William T Redmayne of a son. How's that, eh? Wright
and Flint, Vincent and Gillett to Rotha Marion daughter of Rosa and the
late George Alfred Gillett, 179 Clapham road, Stockwell, Playwood and
Ridsdale at Saint Jude's, Kensington by the very reverend Dr Forrest,
dean of Worcester. Eh? Deaths. Bristow, at Whitehall lane, London: Carr,
Stoke Newington, of gastritis and heart disease: Cockburn, at the Moat
house, Chepstow...

--I know that fellow, says Joe, from bitter experience.

--Cockburn. Dimsey, wife of David Dimsey, late of the admiralty: Miller,
Tottenham, aged eightyfive: Welsh, June 12, at 35 Canning street,
Liverpool, Isabella Helen. How's that for a national press, eh, my brown
son! How's that for Martin Murphy, the Bantry jobber?

--Ah, well, says Joe, handing round the boose. Thanks be to God they had
the start of us. Drink that, citizen.

--I will, says he, honourable person.

--Health, Joe, says I. And all down the form.

Ah! Ow! Don't be talking! I was blue mouldy for the want of that pint.
Declare to God I could hear it hit the pit of my stomach with a click.

And lo, as they quaffed their cup of joy, a godlike messenger came
swiftly in, radiant as the eye of heaven, a comely youth and behind him
there passed an elder of noble gait and countenance, bearing the sacred
scrolls of law and with him his lady wife a dame of peerless lineage,
fairest of her race.

Little Alf Bergan popped in round the door and hid behind Barney's
snug, squeezed up with the laughing. And who was sitting up there in
the corner that I hadn't seen snoring drunk blind to the world only Bob
Doran. I didn't know what was up and Alf kept making signs out of the
door. And begob what was it only that bloody old pantaloon Denis Breen
in his bathslippers with two bloody big books tucked under his oxter and
the wife hotfoot after him, unfortunate wretched woman, trotting like a
poodle. I thought Alf would split.

--Look at him, says he. Breen. He's traipsing all round Dublin with a
postcard someone sent him with U. p: up on it to take a li...

And he doubled up.

--Take a what? says I.

--Libel action, says he, for ten thousand pounds.

--O hell! says I.

The bloody mongrel began to growl that'd put the fear of God in you
seeing something was up but the citizen gave him a kick in the ribs.

_--Bi i dho husht,_ says he.

--Who? says Joe.

--Breen, says Alf. He was in John Henry Menton's and then he went round
to Collis and Ward's and then Tom Rochford met him and sent him round to
the subsheriff's for a lark. O God, I've a pain laughing. U. p: up. The
long fellow gave him an eye as good as a process and now the bloody old
lunatic is gone round to Green street to look for a G man.

--When is long John going to hang that fellow in Mountjoy? says Joe.

--Bergan, says Bob Doran, waking up. Is that Alf Bergan?

--Yes, says Alf. Hanging? Wait till I show you. Here, Terry, give us a
pony. That bloody old fool! Ten thousand pounds. You should have seen
long John's eye. U. p...

And he started laughing.

--Who are you laughing at? says Bob Doran. Is that Bergan?

--Hurry up, Terry boy, says Alf.

Terence O'Ryan heard him and straightway brought him a crystal cup
full of the foamy ebon ale which the noble twin brothers Bungiveagh and
Bungardilaun brew ever in their divine alevats, cunning as the sons of
deathless Leda. For they garner the succulent berries of the hop and
mass and sift and bruise and brew them and they mix therewith sour
juices and bring the must to the sacred fire and cease not night or day
from their toil, those cunning brothers, lords of the vat.

Then did you, chivalrous Terence, hand forth, as to the manner born,
that nectarous beverage and you offered the crystal cup to him that
thirsted, the soul of chivalry, in beauty akin to the immortals.

But he, the young chief of the O'Bergan's, could ill brook to be outdone
in generous deeds but gave therefor with gracious gesture a testoon of
costliest bronze. Thereon embossed in excellent smithwork was seen
the image of a queen of regal port, scion of the house of Brunswick,
Victoria her name, Her Most Excellent Majesty, by grace of God of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British dominions
beyond the sea, queen, defender of the faith, Empress of India, even
she, who bore rule, a victress over many peoples, the wellbeloved, for
they knew and loved her from the rising of the sun to the going down
thereof, the pale, the dark, the ruddy and the ethiop.

--What's that bloody freemason doing, says the citizen, prowling up and
down outside?

--What's that? says Joe.

--Here you are, says Alf, chucking out the rhino. Talking about hanging,
I'll show you something you never saw. Hangmen's letters. Look at here.

So he took a bundle of wisps of letters and envelopes out of his pocket.

--Are you codding? says I.

--Honest injun, says Alf. Read them.

So Joe took up the letters.

--Who are you laughing at? says Bob Doran.

So I saw there was going to be a bit of a dust Bob's a queer chap when
the porter's up in him so says I just to make talk:

--How's Willy Murray those times, Alf?

--I don't know, says Alf I saw him just now in Capel street with Paddy
Dignam. Only I was running after that...

--You what? says Joe, throwing down the letters. With who?

--With Dignam, says Alf.

--Is it Paddy? says Joe.

--Yes, says Alf. Why?

--Don't you know he's dead? says Joe.

--Paddy Dignam dead! says Alf.

--Ay, says Joe.

--Sure I'm after seeing him not five minutes ago, says Alf, as plain as
a pikestaff.

--Who's dead? says Bob Doran.

--You saw his ghost then, says Joe, God between us and harm.

--What? says Alf. Good Christ, only five... What?... And Willy Murray
with him, the two of them there near whatdoyoucallhim's... What? Dignam
dead?

--What about Dignam? says Bob Doran. Who's talking about...?

--Dead! says Alf. He's no more dead than you are.

--Maybe so, says Joe. They took the liberty of burying him this morning
anyhow.

--Paddy? says Alf.

--Ay, says Joe. He paid the debt of nature, God be merciful to him.

--Good Christ! says Alf.

Begob he was what you might call flabbergasted.

In the darkness spirit hands were felt to flutter and when prayer by
tantras had been directed to the proper quarter a faint but increasing
luminosity of ruby light became gradually visible, the apparition of
the etheric double being particularly lifelike owing to the discharge
of jivic rays from the crown of the head and face. Communication was
effected through the pituitary body and also by means of the orangefiery
and scarlet rays emanating from the sacral region and solar plexus.
Questioned by his earthname as to his whereabouts in the heavenworld he
stated that he was now on the path of pr l ya or return but was still
submitted to trial at the hands of certain bloodthirsty entities on the
lower astral levels. In reply to a question as to his first sensations
in the great divide beyond he stated that previously he had seen as in a
glass darkly but that those who had passed over had summit possibilities
of atmic development opened up to them. Interrogated as to whether life
there resembled our experience in the flesh he stated that he had heard
from more favoured beings now in the spirit that their abodes were
equipped with every modern home comfort such as talafana, alavatar,
hatakalda, wataklasat and that the highest adepts were steeped in
waves of volupcy of the very purest nature. Having requested a quart of
buttermilk this was brought and evidently afforded relief. Asked if he
had any message for the living he exhorted all who were still at the
wrong side of Maya to acknowledge the true path for it was reported
in devanic circles that Mars and Jupiter were out for mischief on the
eastern angle where the ram has power. It was then queried whether there
were any special desires on the part of the defunct and the reply was:
_We greet you, friends of earth, who are still in the body. Mind C. K.
doesn't pile it on._ It was ascertained that the reference was to Mr
Cornelius Kelleher, manager of Messrs H. J. O'Neill's popular
funeral establishment, a personal friend of the defunct, who had been
responsible for the carrying out of the interment arrangements. Before
departing he requested that it should be told to his dear son Patsy that
the other boot which he had been looking for was at present under the
commode in the return room and that the pair should be sent to Cullen's
to be soled only as the heels were still good. He stated that this had
greatly perturbed his peace of mind in the other region and earnestly
requested that his desire should be made known.

Assurances were given that the matter would be attended to and it was
intimated that this had given satisfaction.

He is gone from mortal haunts: O'Dignam, sun of our morning. Fleet was
his foot on the bracken: Patrick of the beamy brow. Wail, Banba, with
your wind: and wail, O ocean, with your whirlwind.

--There he is again, says the citizen, staring out.

--Who? says I.

--Bloom, says he. He's on point duty up and down there for the last ten
minutes.

And, begob, I saw his physog do a peep in and then slidder off again.

Little Alf was knocked bawways. Faith, he was.

--Good Christ! says he. I could have sworn it was him.

And says Bob Doran, with the hat on the back of his poll, lowest
blackguard in Dublin when he's under the influence:

--Who said Christ is good?

--I beg your parsnips, says Alf.

--Is that a good Christ, says Bob Doran, to take away poor little Willy
Dignam?

--Ah, well, says Alf, trying to pass it off. He's over all his troubles.

But Bob Doran shouts out of him.

--He's a bloody ruffian, I say, to take away poor little Willy Dignam.

Terry came down and tipped him the wink to keep quiet, that they didn't
want that kind of talk in a respectable licensed premises. And Bob Doran
starts doing the weeps about Paddy Dignam, true as you're there.

--The finest man, says he, snivelling, the finest purest character.

The tear is bloody near your eye. Talking through his bloody hat. Fitter
for him go home to the little sleepwalking bitch he married, Mooney, the
bumbailiff's daughter, mother kept a kip in Hardwicke street, that
used to be stravaging about the landings Bantam Lyons told me that was
stopping there at two in the morning without a stitch on her, exposing
her person, open to all comers, fair field and no favour.

--The noblest, the truest, says he. And he's gone, poor little Willy,
poor little Paddy Dignam.

And mournful and with a heavy heart he bewept the extinction of that
beam of heaven.

Old Garryowen started growling again at Bloom that was skeezing round
the door.

--Come in, come on, he won't eat you, says the citizen.

So Bloom slopes in with his cod's eye on the dog and he asks Terry was
Martin Cunningham there.

--O, Christ M'Keown, says Joe, reading one of the letters. Listen to
this, will you?

And he starts reading out one.

_7 Hunter Street, Liverpool. To the High Sheriff of Dublin, Dublin._

_Honoured sir i beg to offer my services in the abovementioned painful
case i hanged Joe Gann in Bootle jail on the 12 of Febuary 1900 and i
hanged..._

--Show us, Joe, says I.

--_... private Arthur Chace for fowl murder of Jessie Tilsit in
Pentonville prison and i was assistant when..._

--Jesus, says I.

--_... Billington executed the awful murderer Toad Smith..._

The citizen made a grab at the letter.

--Hold hard, says Joe, _i have a special nack of putting the noose once
in he can't get out hoping to be favoured i remain, honoured sir, my
terms is five ginnees._

_H. RUMBOLD, MASTER BARBER._

--And a barbarous bloody barbarian he is too, says the citizen.

--And the dirty scrawl of the wretch, says Joe. Here, says he, take them
to hell out of my sight, Alf. Hello, Bloom, says he, what will you have?

So they started arguing about the point, Bloom saying he wouldn't and he
couldn't and excuse him no offence and all to that and then he said well
he'd just take a cigar. Gob, he's a prudent member and no mistake.

--Give us one of your prime stinkers, Terry, says Joe.

And Alf was telling us there was one chap sent in a mourning card with a
black border round it.

--They're all barbers, says he, from the black country that would hang
their own fathers for five quid down and travelling expenses.

And he was telling us there's two fellows waiting below to pull his
heels down when he gets the drop and choke him properly and then they
chop up the rope after and sell the bits for a few bob a skull.

In the dark land they bide, the vengeful knights of the razor. Their
deadly coil they grasp: yea, and therein they lead to Erebus whatsoever
wight hath done a deed of blood for I will on nowise suffer it even so
saith the Lord.

So they started talking about capital punishment and of course Bloom
comes out with the why and the wherefore and all the codology of the
business and the old dog smelling him all the time I'm told those jewies
does have a sort of a queer odour coming off them for dogs about I don't
know what all deterrent effect and so forth and so on.

--There's one thing it hasn't a deterrent effect on, says Alf.

--What's that? says Joe.

--The poor bugger's tool that's being hanged, says Alf.

--That so? says Joe.

--God's truth, says Alf. I heard that from the head warder that was in

Kilmainham when they hanged Joe Brady, the invincible. He told me when
they cut him down after the drop it was standing up in their faces like
a poker.

--Ruling passion strong in death, says Joe, as someone said.

--That can be explained by science, says Bloom. It's only a natural
phenomenon, don't you see, because on account of the...

And then he starts with his jawbreakers about phenomenon and science and
this phenomenon and the other phenomenon.

The distinguished scientist Herr Professor Luitpold Blumenduft tendered
medical evidence to the effect that the instantaneous fracture of the
cervical vertebrae and consequent scission of the spinal cord would,
according to the best approved tradition of medical science, be
calculated to inevitably produce in the human subject a violent
ganglionic stimulus of the nerve centres of the genital apparatus,
thereby causing the elastic pores of the _corpora cavernosa_ to rapidly
dilate in such a way as to instantaneously facilitate the flow of blood
to that part of the human anatomy known as the penis or male organ
resulting in the phenomenon which has been denominated by the faculty
a morbid upwards and outwards philoprogenitive erection _in articulo
mortis per diminutionem capitis._

So of course the citizen was only waiting for the wink of the word and
he starts gassing out of him about the invincibles and the old guard and
the men of sixtyseven and who fears to speak of ninetyeight and Joe with
him about all the fellows that were hanged, drawn and transported for
the cause by drumhead courtmartial and a new Ireland and new this, that
and the other. Talking about new Ireland he ought to go and get a new
dog so he ought. Mangy ravenous brute sniffing and sneezing all round
the place and scratching his scabs. And round he goes to Bob Doran that
was standing Alf a half one sucking up for what he could get. So of
course Bob Doran starts doing the bloody fool with him:

--Give us the paw! Give the paw, doggy! Good old doggy! Give the paw
here! Give us the paw!

Arrah, bloody end to the paw he'd paw and Alf trying to keep him from
tumbling off the bloody stool atop of the bloody old dog and he talking
all kinds of drivel about training by kindness and thoroughbred dog and
intelligent dog: give you the bloody pip. Then he starts scraping a few
bits of old biscuit out of the bottom of a Jacobs' tin he told Terry to
bring. Gob, he golloped it down like old boots and his tongue hanging
out of him a yard long for more. Near ate the tin and all, hungry bloody
mongrel.

And the citizen and Bloom having an argument about the point, the
brothers Sheares and Wolfe Tone beyond on Arbour Hill and Robert Emmet
and die for your country, the Tommy Moore touch about Sara Curran and
she's far from the land. And Bloom, of course, with his knockmedown
cigar putting on swank with his lardy face. Phenomenon! The fat heap he
married is a nice old phenomenon with a back on her like a ballalley.
Time they were stopping up in the _City Arms_ pisser Burke told me there
was an old one there with a cracked loodheramaun of a nephew and Bloom
trying to get the soft side of her doing the mollycoddle playing bÃ©zique
to come in for a bit of the wampum in her will and not eating meat of a
Friday because the old one was always thumping her craw and taking the
lout out for a walk. And one time he led him the rounds of Dublin and,
by the holy farmer, he never cried crack till he brought him home as
drunk as a boiled owl and he said he did it to teach him the evils of
alcohol and by herrings, if the three women didn't near roast him, it's
a queer story, the old one, Bloom's wife and Mrs O'Dowd that kept the
hotel. Jesus, I had to laugh at pisser Burke taking them off chewing
the fat. And Bloom with his _but don't you see?_ and _but on the other
hand_. And sure, more be token, the lout I'm told was in Power's after,
the blender's, round in Cope street going home footless in a cab five
times in the week after drinking his way through all the samples in the
bloody establishment. Phenomenon!

--The memory of the dead, says the citizen taking up his pintglass and
glaring at Bloom.

--Ay, ay, says Joe.

--You don't grasp my point, says Bloom. What I mean is...

--_Sinn Fein!_ says the citizen. _Sinn Fein amhain!_ The friends we love
are by our side and the foes we hate before us.

The last farewell was affecting in the extreme. From the belfries far
and near the funereal deathbell tolled unceasingly while all around the
gloomy precincts rolled the ominous warning of a hundred muffled drums
punctuated by the hollow booming of pieces of ordnance. The deafening
claps of thunder and the dazzling flashes of lightning which lit up
the ghastly scene testified that the artillery of heaven had lent its
supernatural pomp to the already gruesome spectacle. A torrential rain
poured down from the floodgates of the angry heavens upon the
bared heads of the assembled multitude which numbered at the
lowest computation five hundred thousand persons. A posse of Dublin
Metropolitan police superintended by the Chief Commissioner in person
maintained order in the vast throng for whom the York street brass and
reed band whiled away the intervening time by admirably rendering on
their blackdraped instruments the matchless melody endeared to us from
the cradle by Speranza's plaintive muse. Special quick excursion trains
and upholstered charabancs had been provided for the comfort of our
country cousins of whom there were large contingents. Considerable
amusement was caused by the favourite Dublin streetsingers L-n-h-n and
M-ll-g-n who sang _The Night before Larry was stretched_ in their usual
mirth-provoking fashion. Our two inimitable drolls did a roaring trade
with their broadsheets among lovers of the comedy element and nobody
who has a corner in his heart for real Irish fun without vulgarity
will grudge them their hardearned pennies. The children of the Male and
Female Foundling Hospital who thronged the windows overlooking the scene
were delighted with this unexpected addition to the day's entertainment
and a word of praise is due to the Little Sisters of the Poor for their
excellent idea of affording the poor fatherless and motherless children
a genuinely instructive treat. The viceregal houseparty which included
many wellknown ladies was chaperoned by Their Excellencies to the most
favourable positions on the grandstand while the picturesque foreign
delegation known as the Friends of the Emerald Isle was accommodated
on a tribune directly opposite. The delegation, present in full force,
consisted of Commendatore Bacibaci Beninobenone (the semiparalysed
_doyen_ of the party who had to be assisted to his seat by the aid of a
powerful steam crane), Monsieur Pierrepaul PetitÃ©patant, the Grandjoker
Vladinmire Pokethankertscheff, the Archjoker Leopold Rudolph von
Schwanzenbad-Hodenthaler, Countess Marha VirÃ¡ga KisÃ¡szony PutrÃ¡pesthi,
Hiram Y. Bomboost, Count Athanatos Karamelopulos, Ali Baba Backsheesh
Rahat Lokum Effendi, Senor Hidalgo Caballero Don Pecadillo y Palabras
y Paternoster de la Malora de la Malaria, Hokopoko Harakiri, Hi Hung
Chang, Olaf Kobberkeddelsen, Mynheer Trik van Trumps, Pan Poleaxe
Paddyrisky, Goosepond Prhklstr Kratchinabritchisitch, Borus
Hupinkoff, Herr Hurhausdirektorpresident Hans Chuechli-Steuerli,
Nationalgymnasiummuseumsanatoriumandsuspensoriumsordinaryprivatdocent
-generalhistoryspecialprofessordoctor Kriegfried Ueberallgemein. All the
delegates without exception expressed themselves in the strongest
possible heterogeneous terms concerning the nameless barbarity which
they had been called upon to witness. An animated altercation (in which
all took part) ensued among the F. O. T. E. I. as to whether the eighth
or the ninth of March was the correct date of the birth of Ireland's
patron saint. In the course of the argument cannonballs, scimitars,
boomerangs, blunderbusses, stinkpots, meatchoppers, umbrellas,
catapults, knuckledusters, sandbags, lumps of pig iron were resorted to
and blows were freely exchanged. The baby policeman, Constable
MacFadden, summoned by special courier from Booterstown, quickly
restored order and with lightning promptitude proposed the seventeenth
of the month as a solution equally honourable for both contending
parties. The readywitted ninefooter's suggestion at once appealed to all
and was unanimously accepted. Constable MacFadden was heartily
congratulated by all the F.O.T.E.I., several of whom were bleeding
profusely. Commendatore Beninobenone having been extricated from
underneath the presidential armchair, it was explained by his legal
adviser Avvocato Pagamimi that the various articles secreted in his
thirtytwo pockets had been abstracted by him during the affray from the
pockets of his junior colleagues in the hope of bringing them to their
senses. The objects (which included several hundred ladies' and
gentlemen's gold and silver watches) were promptly restored to their
rightful owners and general harmony reigned supreme.

Quietly, unassumingly Rumbold stepped on to the scaffold in faultless
morning dress and wearing his favourite flower, the _Gladiolus
Cruentus_. He announced his presence by that gentle Rumboldian cough
which so many have tried (unsuccessfully) to imitate--short,
painstaking yet withal so characteristic of the man. The arrival of the
worldrenowned headsman was greeted by a roar of acclamation from the
huge concourse, the viceregal ladies waving their handkerchiefs in
their excitement while the even more excitable foreign delegates
cheered vociferously in a medley of cries, _hoch, banzai, eljen, zivio,
chinchin, polla kronia, hiphip, vive, Allah_, amid which the ringing
_evviva_ of the delegate of the land of song (a high double F recalling
those piercingly lovely notes with which the eunuch Catalani beglamoured
our greatgreatgrandmothers) was easily distinguishable. It was exactly
seventeen o'clock. The signal for prayer was then promptly given by
megaphone and in an instant all heads were bared, the commendatore's
patriarchal sombrero, which has been in the possession of his family
since the revolution of Rienzi, being removed by his medical adviser
in attendance, Dr Pippi. The learned prelate who administered the last
comforts of holy religion to the hero martyr when about to pay the death
penalty knelt in a most christian spirit in a pool of rainwater, his
cassock above his hoary head, and offered up to the throne of grace
fervent prayers of supplication. Hand by the block stood the grim figure
of the executioner, his visage being concealed in a tengallon pot
with two circular perforated apertures through which his eyes glowered
furiously. As he awaited the fatal signal he tested the edge of his
horrible weapon by honing it upon his brawny forearm or decapitated
in rapid succession a flock of sheep which had been provided by the
admirers of his fell but necessary office. On a handsome mahogany table
near him were neatly arranged the quartering knife, the various
finely tempered disembowelling appliances (specially supplied by the
worldfamous firm of cutlers, Messrs John Round and Sons, Sheffield),
a terra cotta saucepan for the reception of the duodenum, colon,
blind intestine and appendix etc when successfully extracted and two
commodious milkjugs destined to receive the most precious blood of the
most precious victim. The housesteward of the amalgamated cats' and
dogs' home was in attendance to convey these vessels when replenished
to that beneficent institution. Quite an excellent repast consisting of
rashers and eggs, fried steak and onions, done to a nicety, delicious
hot breakfast rolls and invigorating tea had been considerately provided
by the authorities for the consumption of the central figure of the
tragedy who was in capital spirits when prepared for death and evinced
the keenest interest in the proceedings from beginning to end but he,
with an abnegation rare in these our times, rose nobly to the occasion
and expressed the dying wish (immediately acceded to) that the meal
should be divided in aliquot parts among the members of the sick and
indigent roomkeepers' association as a token of his regard and esteem.
The _nec_ and _non plus ultra_ of emotion were reached when the blushing
bride elect burst her way through the serried ranks of the bystanders
and flung herself upon the muscular bosom of him who was about to be
launched into eternity for her sake. The hero folded her willowy form in
a loving embrace murmuring fondly _Sheila, my own_. Encouraged by
this use of her christian name she kissed passionately all the various
suitable areas of his person which the decencies of prison garb
permitted her ardour to reach. She swore to him as they mingled the salt
streams of their tears that she would ever cherish his memory, that she
would never forget her hero boy who went to his death with a song on his
lips as if he were but going to a hurling match in Clonturk park. She
brought back to his recollection the happy days of blissful childhood
together on the banks of Anna Liffey when they had indulged in the
innocent pastimes of the young and, oblivious of the dreadful present,
they both laughed heartily, all the spectators, including the venerable
pastor, joining in the general merriment. That monster audience simply
rocked with delight. But anon they were overcome with grief and clasped
their hands for the last time. A fresh torrent of tears burst from their
lachrymal ducts and the vast concourse of people, touched to the inmost
core, broke into heartrending sobs, not the least affected being the
aged prebendary himself. Big strong men, officers of the peace and
genial giants of the royal Irish constabulary, were making frank use of
their handkerchiefs and it is safe to say that there was not a dry eye
in that record assemblage. A most romantic incident occurred when a
handsome young Oxford graduate, noted for his chivalry towards the fair
sex, stepped forward and, presenting his visiting card, bankbook
and genealogical tree, solicited the hand of the hapless young lady,
requesting her to name the day, and was accepted on the spot. Every lady
in the audience was presented with a tasteful souvenir of the occasion
in the shape of a skull and crossbones brooch, a timely and generous
act which evoked a fresh outburst of emotion: and when the gallant young
Oxonian (the bearer, by the way, of one of the most timehonoured names
in Albion's history) placed on the finger of his blushing _fiancÃ©e_ an
expensive engagement ring with emeralds set in the form of a
fourleaved shamrock the excitement knew no bounds. Nay, even the
ster provostmarshal, lieutenantcolonel Tomkin-Maxwell ffrenchmullan
Tomlinson, who presided on the sad occasion, he who had blown a
considerable number of sepoys from the cannonmouth without flinching,
could not now restrain his natural emotion. With his mailed gauntlet
he brushed away a furtive tear and was overheard, by those privileged
burghers who happened to be in his immediate _entourage,_ to murmur to
himself in a faltering undertone:

--God blimey if she aint a clinker, that there bleeding tart. Blimey it
makes me kind of bleeding cry, straight, it does, when I sees her cause
I thinks of my old mashtub what's waiting for me down Limehouse way.

So then the citizen begins talking about the Irish language and the
corporation meeting and all to that and the shoneens that can't speak
their own language and Joe chipping in because he stuck someone for a
quid and Bloom putting in his old goo with his twopenny stump that
he cadged off of Joe and talking about the Gaelic league and the
antitreating league and drink, the curse of Ireland. Antitreating is
about the size of it. Gob, he'd let you pour all manner of drink down
his throat till the Lord would call him before you'd ever see the froth
of his pint. And one night I went in with a fellow into one of their
musical evenings, song and dance about she could get up on a truss of
hay she could my Maureen Lay and there was a fellow with a Ballyhooly
blue ribbon badge spiffing out of him in Irish and a lot of colleen
bawns going about with temperance beverages and selling medals
and oranges and lemonade and a few old dry buns, gob, flahoolagh
entertainment, don't be talking. Ireland sober is Ireland free. And
then an old fellow starts blowing into his bagpipes and all the gougers
shuffling their feet to the tune the old cow died of. And one or two
sky pilots having an eye around that there was no goings on with the
females, hitting below the belt.

So howandever, as I was saying, the old dog seeing the tin was empty
starts mousing around by Joe and me. I'd train him by kindness, so I
would, if he was my dog. Give him a rousing fine kick now and again
where it wouldn't blind him.

--Afraid he'll bite you? says the citizen, jeering.

--No, says I. But he might take my leg for a lamppost.

So he calls the old dog over.

--What's on you, Garry? says he.

Then he starts hauling and mauling and talking to him in Irish and the
old towser growling, letting on to answer, like a duet in the opera.
Such growling you never heard as they let off between them. Someone that
has nothing better to do ought to write a letter _pro bono publico_ to
the papers about the muzzling order for a dog the like of that. Growling
and grousing and his eye all bloodshot from the drouth is in it and the
hydrophobia dropping out of his jaws.

All those who are interested in the spread of human culture among the
lower animals (and their name is legion) should make a point of not
missing the really marvellous exhibition of cynanthropy given by the
famous old Irish red setter wolfdog formerly known by the _sobriquet_ of
Garryowen and recently rechristened by his large circle of friends and
acquaintances Owen Garry. The exhibition, which is the result of years
of training by kindness and a carefully thoughtout dietary system,
comprises, among other achievements, the recitation of verse. Our
greatest living phonetic expert (wild horses shall not drag it from us!)
has left no stone unturned in his efforts to delucidate and compare
the verse recited and has found it bears a _striking_ resemblance (the
italics are ours) to the ranns of ancient Celtic bards. We are not
speaking so much of those delightful lovesongs with which the writer who
conceals his identity under the graceful pseudonym of the Little
Sweet Branch has familiarised the bookloving world but rather (as
a contributor D. O. C. points out in an interesting communication
published by an evening contemporary) of the harsher and more personal
note which is found in the satirical effusions of the famous Raftery and
of Donal MacConsidine to say nothing of a more modern lyrist at present
very much in the public eye. We subjoin a specimen which has been
rendered into English by an eminent scholar whose name for the moment we
are not at liberty to disclose though we believe that our readers will
find the topical allusion rather more than an indication. The metrical
system of the canine original, which recalls the intricate alliterative
and isosyllabic rules of the Welsh englyn, is infinitely more
complicated but we believe our readers will agree that the spirit has
been well caught. Perhaps it should be added that the effect is greatly
increased if Owen's verse be spoken somewhat slowly and indistinctly in
a tone suggestive of suppressed rancour.

     _The curse of my curses
     Seven days every day
     And seven dry Thursdays
     On you, Barney Kiernan,
     Has no sup of water
     To cool my courage,
     And my guts red roaring
     After Lowry's lights._

So he told Terry to bring some water for the dog and, gob, you could
hear him lapping it up a mile off. And Joe asked him would he have
another.

--I will, says he, _a chara_, to show there's no ill feeling.

Gob, he's not as green as he's cabbagelooking. Arsing around from one
pub to another, leaving it to your own honour, with old Giltrap's dog
and getting fed up by the ratepayers and corporators. Entertainment for
man and beast. And says Joe:

--Could you make a hole in another pint?

--Could a swim duck? says I.

--Same again, Terry, says Joe. Are you sure you won't have anything in
the way of liquid refreshment? says he.

--Thank you, no, says Bloom. As a matter of fact I just wanted to meet
Martin Cunningham, don't you see, about this insurance of poor Dignam's.
Martin asked me to go to the house. You see, he, Dignam, I mean, didn't
serve any notice of the assignment on the company at the time and
nominally under the act the mortgagee can't recover on the policy.

--Holy Wars, says Joe, laughing, that's a good one if old Shylock is
landed. So the wife comes out top dog, what?

--Well, that's a point, says Bloom, for the wife's admirers.

--Whose admirers? says Joe.

--The wife's advisers, I mean, says Bloom.

Then he starts all confused mucking it up about mortgagor under the act
like the lord chancellor giving it out on the bench and for the benefit
of the wife and that a trust is created but on the other hand that
Dignam owed Bridgeman the money and if now the wife or the widow
contested the mortgagee's right till he near had the head of me addled
with his mortgagor under the act. He was bloody safe he wasn't run in
himself under the act that time as a rogue and vagabond only he had a
friend in court. Selling bazaar tickets or what do you call it royal
Hungarian privileged lottery. True as you're there. O, commend me to an
israelite! Royal and privileged Hungarian robbery.

So Bob Doran comes lurching around asking Bloom to tell Mrs Dignam he
was sorry for her trouble and he was very sorry about the funeral and
to tell her that he said and everyone who knew him said that there was
never a truer, a finer than poor little Willy that's dead to tell her.
Choking with bloody foolery. And shaking Bloom's hand doing the tragic
to tell her that. Shake hands, brother. You're a rogue and I'm another.

--Let me, said he, so far presume upon our acquaintance which, however
slight it may appear if judged by the standard of mere time, is founded,
as I hope and believe, on a sentiment of mutual esteem as to request of
you this favour. But, should I have overstepped the limits of reserve
let the sincerity of my feelings be the excuse for my boldness.

--No, rejoined the other, I appreciate to the full the motives which
actuate your conduct and I shall discharge the office you entrust to
me consoled by the reflection that, though the errand be one of sorrow,
this proof of your confidence sweetens in some measure the bitterness of
the cup.

--Then suffer me to take your hand, said he. The goodness of your heart,
I feel sure, will dictate to you better than my inadequate words
the expressions which are most suitable to convey an emotion whose
poignancy, were I to give vent to my feelings, would deprive me even of
speech.

And off with him and out trying to walk straight. Boosed at five
o'clock. Night he was near being lagged only Paddy Leonard knew the
bobby, 14A. Blind to the world up in a shebeen in Bride street after
closing time, fornicating with two shawls and a bully on guard, drinking
porter out of teacups. And calling himself a Frenchy for the shawls,
Joseph Manuo, and talking against the Catholic religion, and he serving
mass in Adam and Eve's when he was young with his eyes shut, who wrote
the new testament, and the old testament, and hugging and smugging. And
the two shawls killed with the laughing, picking his pockets, the bloody
fool and he spilling the porter all over the bed and the two shawls
screeching laughing at one another. _How is your testament? Have you got
an old testament?_ Only Paddy was passing there, I tell you what. Then
see him of a Sunday with his little concubine of a wife, and she wagging
her tail up the aisle of the chapel with her patent boots on her, no
less, and her violets, nice as pie, doing the little lady. Jack Mooney's
sister. And the old prostitute of a mother procuring rooms to street
couples. Gob, Jack made him toe the line. Told him if he didn't patch up
the pot, Jesus, he'd kick the shite out of him.

So Terry brought the three pints.

--Here, says Joe, doing the honours. Here, citizen.

--_Slan leat_, says he.

--Fortune, Joe, says I. Good health, citizen.

Gob, he had his mouth half way down the tumbler already. Want a small
fortune to keep him in drinks.

--Who is the long fellow running for the mayoralty, Alf? says Joe.

--Friend of yours, says Alf.

--Nannan? says Joe. The mimber?

--I won't mention any names, says Alf.

--I thought so, says Joe. I saw him up at that meeting now with William
Field, M. P., the cattle traders.

--Hairy Iopas, says the citizen, that exploded volcano, the darling of
all countries and the idol of his own.

So Joe starts telling the citizen about the foot and mouth disease
and the cattle traders and taking action in the matter and the citizen
sending them all to the rightabout and Bloom coming out with his
sheepdip for the scab and a hoose drench for coughing calves and the
guaranteed remedy for timber tongue. Because he was up one time in a
knacker's yard. Walking about with his book and pencil here's my head
and my heels are coming till Joe Cuffe gave him the order of the boot
for giving lip to a grazier. Mister Knowall. Teach your grandmother how
to milk ducks. Pisser Burke was telling me in the hotel the wife used
to be in rivers of tears some times with Mrs O'Dowd crying her eyes out
with her eight inches of fat all over her. Couldn't loosen her farting
strings but old cod's eye was waltzing around her showing her how to do
it. What's your programme today? Ay. Humane methods. Because the poor
animals suffer and experts say and the best known remedy that doesn't
cause pain to the animal and on the sore spot administer gently. Gob,
he'd have a soft hand under a hen.

Ga Ga Gara. Klook Klook Klook. Black Liz is our hen. She lays eggs for
us. When she lays her egg she is so glad. Gara. Klook Klook Klook. Then
comes good uncle Leo. He puts his hand under black Liz and takes her
fresh egg. Ga ga ga ga Gara. Klook Klook Klook.

--Anyhow, says Joe, Field and Nannetti are going over tonight to London
to ask about it on the floor of the house of commons.

--Are you sure, says Bloom, the councillor is going? I wanted to see
him, as it happens.

--Well, he's going off by the mailboat, says Joe, tonight.

--That's too bad, says Bloom. I wanted particularly. Perhaps only Mr
Field is going. I couldn't phone. No. You're sure?

--Nannan's going too, says Joe. The league told him to ask a question
tomorrow about the commissioner of police forbidding Irish games in the
park. What do you think of that, citizen? _The Sluagh na h-Eireann_.

Mr Cowe Conacre (Multifarnham. Nat.): Arising out of the question of
my honourable friend, the member for Shillelagh, may I ask the right
honourable gentleman whether the government has issued orders that these
animals shall be slaughtered though no medical evidence is forthcoming
as to their pathological condition?

Mr Allfours (Tamoshant. Con.): Honourable members are already in
possession of the evidence produced before a committee of the whole
house. I feel I cannot usefully add anything to that. The answer to the
honourable member's question is in the affirmative.

Mr Orelli O'Reilly (Montenotte. Nat.): Have similar orders been issued
for the slaughter of human animals who dare to play Irish games in the
Phoenix park?

Mr Allfours: The answer is in the negative.

Mr Cowe Conacre: Has the right honourable gentleman's famous
Mitchelstown telegram inspired the policy of gentlemen on the Treasury
bench? (O! O!)

Mr Allfours: I must have notice of that question.

Mr Staylewit (Buncombe. Ind.): Don't hesitate to shoot.

(Ironical opposition cheers.)

The speaker: Order! Order!

(The house rises. Cheers.)

--There's the man, says Joe, that made the Gaelic sports revival. There
he is sitting there. The man that got away James Stephens. The champion
of all Ireland at putting the sixteen pound shot. What was your best
throw, citizen?

--_Na bacleis_, says the citizen, letting on to be modest. There was a
time I was as good as the next fellow anyhow.

--Put it there, citizen, says Joe. You were and a bloody sight better.

--Is that really a fact? says Alf.

--Yes, says Bloom. That's well known. Did you not know that?

So off they started about Irish sports and shoneen games the like of
lawn tennis and about hurley and putting the stone and racy of the soil
and building up a nation once again and all to that. And of course Bloom
had to have his say too about if a fellow had a rower's heart violent
exercise was bad. I declare to my antimacassar if you took up a straw
from the bloody floor and if you said to Bloom: _Look at, Bloom. Do you
see that straw? That's a straw_. Declare to my aunt he'd talk about it
for an hour so he would and talk steady.

A most interesting discussion took place in the ancient hall of _Brian
O'ciarnain's_ in _Sraid na Bretaine Bheag_, under the auspices of
_Sluagh na h-Eireann_, on the revival of ancient Gaelic sports and the
importance of physical culture, as understood in ancient Greece and
ancient Rome and ancient Ireland, for the development of the race.
The venerable president of the noble order was in the chair and the
attendance was of large dimensions. After an instructive discourse by
the chairman, a magnificent oration eloquently and forcibly expressed,
a most interesting and instructive discussion of the usual high standard
of excellence ensued as to the desirability of the revivability of
the ancient games and sports of our ancient Panceltic forefathers. The
wellknown and highly respected worker in the cause of our old tongue, Mr
Joseph M'Carthy Hynes, made an eloquent appeal for the resuscitation of
the ancient Gaelic sports and pastimes, practised morning and evening
by Finn MacCool, as calculated to revive the best traditions of manly
strength and prowess handed down to us from ancient ages. L. Bloom, who
met with a mixed reception of applause and hisses, having espoused the
negative the vocalist chairman brought the discussion to a close, in
response to repeated requests and hearty plaudits from all parts of
a bumper house, by a remarkably noteworthy rendering of the immortal
Thomas Osborne Davis' evergreen verses (happily too familiar to need
recalling here) _A nation once again_ in the execution of which the
veteran patriot champion may be said without fear of contradiction
to have fairly excelled himself. The Irish Caruso-Garibaldi was in
superlative form and his stentorian notes were heard to the greatest
advantage in the timehonoured anthem sung as only our citizen can sing
it. His superb highclass vocalism, which by its superquality greatly
enhanced his already international reputation, was vociferously
applauded by the large audience among which were to be noticed many
prominent members of the clergy as well as representatives of the press
and the bar and the other learned professions. The proceedings then
terminated.

Amongst the clergy present were the very rev. William Delany, S. J., L.
L. D.; the rt rev. Gerald Molloy, D. D.; the rev. P. J. Kavanagh, C. S.
Sp.; the rev. T. Waters, C. C.; the rev. John M. Ivers, P. P.; the rev.
P. J. Cleary, O. S. F.; the rev. L. J. Hickey, O. P.; the very rev. Fr.
Nicholas, O. S. F. C.; the very rev. B. Gorman, O. D. C.; the rev. T.
Maher, S. J.; the very rev. James Murphy, S. J.; the rev. John Lavery,
V. F.; the very rev. William Doherty, D. D.; the rev. Peter Fagan, O.
M.; the rev. T. Brangan, O. S. A.; the rev. J. Flavin, C. C.; the
rev. M. A. Hackett, C. C.; the rev. W. Hurley, C. C.; the rt rev. Mgr
M'Manus, V. G.; the rev. B. R. Slattery, O. M. I.; the very rev. M.
D. Scally, P. P.; the rev. F. T. Purcell, O. P.; the very rev. Timothy
canon Gorman, P. P.; the rev. J. Flanagan, C. C. The laity included P.
Fay, T. Quirke, etc., etc.

--Talking about violent exercise, says Alf, were you at that
Keogh-Bennett match?

--No, says Joe.

--I heard So and So made a cool hundred quid over it, says Alf.

--Who? Blazes? says Joe.

And says Bloom:

--What I meant about tennis, for example, is the agility and training
the eye.

--Ay, Blazes, says Alf. He let out that Myler was on the beer to run up
the odds and he swatting all the time.

--We know him, says the citizen. The traitor's son. We know what put
English gold in his pocket.

---True for you, says Joe.

And Bloom cuts in again about lawn tennis and the circulation of the
blood, asking Alf:

--Now, don't you think, Bergan?

--Myler dusted the floor with him, says Alf. Heenan and Sayers was only
a bloody fool to it. Handed him the father and mother of a beating. See
the little kipper not up to his navel and the big fellow swiping. God,
he gave him one last puck in the wind, Queensberry rules and all, made
him puke what he never ate.

It was a historic and a hefty battle when Myler and Percy were scheduled
to don the gloves for the purse of fifty sovereigns. Handicapped as he
was by lack of poundage, Dublin's pet lamb made up for it by superlative
skill in ringcraft. The final bout of fireworks was a gruelling for both
champions. The welterweight sergeantmajor had tapped some lively claret
in the previous mixup during which Keogh had been receivergeneral of
rights and lefts, the artilleryman putting in some neat work on the
pet's nose, and Myler came on looking groggy. The soldier got to
business, leading off with a powerful left jab to which the Irish
gladiator retaliated by shooting out a stiff one flush to the point of
Bennett's jaw. The redcoat ducked but the Dubliner lifted him with a
left hook, the body punch being a fine one. The men came to handigrips.
Myler quickly became busy and got his man under, the bout ending with
the bulkier man on the ropes, Myler punishing him. The Englishman, whose
right eye was nearly closed, took his corner where he was liberally
drenched with water and when the bell went came on gamey and brimful of
pluck, confident of knocking out the fistic Eblanite in jigtime. It was
a fight to a finish and the best man for it. The two fought like tigers
and excitement ran fever high. The referee twice cautioned Pucking Percy
for holding but the pet was tricky and his footwork a treat to watch.
After a brisk exchange of courtesies during which a smart upper cut of
the military man brought blood freely from his opponent's mouth the
lamb suddenly waded in all over his man and landed a terrific left to
Battling Bennett's stomach, flooring him flat. It was a knockout clean
and clever. Amid tense expectation the Portobello bruiser was being
counted out when Bennett's second Ole Pfotts Wettstein threw in the
towel and the Santry boy was declared victor to the frenzied cheers of
the public who broke through the ringropes and fairly mobbed him with
delight.

--He knows which side his bread is buttered, says Alf. I hear he's
running a concert tour now up in the north.

--He is, says Joe. Isn't he?

--Who? says Bloom. Ah, yes. That's quite true. Yes, a kind of summer
tour, you see. Just a holiday.

--Mrs B. is the bright particular star, isn't she? says Joe.

--My wife? says Bloom. She's singing, yes. I think it will be a success
too.

He's an excellent man to organise. Excellent.

Hoho begob says I to myself says I. That explains the milk in the
cocoanut and absence of hair on the animal's chest. Blazes doing the
tootle on the flute. Concert tour. Dirty Dan the dodger's son off Island
bridge that sold the same horses twice over to the government to fight
the Boers. Old Whatwhat. I called about the poor and water rate, Mr
Boylan. You what? The water rate, Mr Boylan. You whatwhat? That's the
bucko that'll organise her, take my tip. 'Twixt me and you Caddareesh.

Pride of Calpe's rocky mount, the ravenhaired daughter of Tweedy. There
grew she to peerless beauty where loquat and almond scent the air. The
gardens of Alameda knew her step: the garths of olives knew and bowed.
The chaste spouse of Leopold is she: Marion of the bountiful bosoms.

And lo, there entered one of the clan of the O'Molloy's, a comely hero
of white face yet withal somewhat ruddy, his majesty's counsel learned
in the law, and with him the prince and heir of the noble line of
Lambert.

--Hello, Ned.

--Hello, Alf.

--Hello, Jack.

--Hello, Joe.

--God save you, says the citizen.

--Save you kindly, says J. J. What'll it be, Ned?

--Half one, says Ned.

So J. J. ordered the drinks.

--Were you round at the court? says Joe.

--Yes, says J. J. He'll square that, Ned, says he.

--Hope so, says Ned.

Now what were those two at? J. J. getting him off the grand jury list
and the other give him a leg over the stile. With his name in Stubbs's.
Playing cards, hobnobbing with flash toffs with a swank glass in their
eye, adrinking fizz and he half smothered in writs and garnishee orders.
Pawning his gold watch in Cummins of Francis street where no-one would
know him in the private office when I was there with Pisser releasing
his boots out of the pop. What's your name, sir? Dunne, says he. Ay, and
done says I. Gob, he'll come home by weeping cross one of those days,
I'm thinking.

--Did you see that bloody lunatic Breen round there? says Alf. U. p: up.

--Yes, says J. J. Looking for a private detective.

--Ay, says Ned. And he wanted right go wrong to address the court only
Corny Kelleher got round him telling him to get the handwriting examined
first.

--Ten thousand pounds, says Alf, laughing. God, I'd give anything to
hear him before a judge and jury.

--Was it you did it, Alf? says Joe. The truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, so help you Jimmy Johnson.

--Me? says Alf. Don't cast your nasturtiums on my character.

--Whatever statement you make, says Joe, will be taken down in evidence
against you.

--Of course an action would lie, says J. J. It implies that he is not
_compos mentis_. U. p: up.

_--Compos_ your eye! says Alf, laughing. Do you know that he's balmy?
Look at his head. Do you know that some mornings he has to get his hat
on with a shoehorn.

--Yes, says J. J., but the truth of a libel is no defence to an
indictment for publishing it in the eyes of the law.

--Ha ha, Alf, says Joe.

--Still, says Bloom, on account of the poor woman, I mean his wife.

--Pity about her, says the citizen. Or any other woman marries a half
and half.

--How half and half? says Bloom. Do you mean he...

--Half and half I mean, says the citizen. A fellow that's neither fish
nor flesh.

--Nor good red herring, says Joe.

--That what's I mean, says the citizen. A pishogue, if you know what
that is.

Begob I saw there was trouble coming. And Bloom explaining he meant on
account of it being cruel for the wife having to go round after the
old stuttering fool. Cruelty to animals so it is to let that bloody
povertystricken Breen out on grass with his beard out tripping him,
bringing down the rain. And she with her nose cockahoop after she
married him because a cousin of his old fellow's was pewopener to the
pope. Picture of him on the wall with his Smashall Sweeney's moustaches,
the signior Brini from Summerhill, the eyetallyano, papal Zouave to the
Holy Father, has left the quay and gone to Moss street. And who was
he, tell us? A nobody, two pair back and passages, at seven shillings a
week, and he covered with all kinds of breastplates bidding defiance to
the world.

--And moreover, says J. J., a postcard is publication. It was held to
be sufficient evidence of malice in the testcase Sadgrove v. Hole. In my
opinion an action might lie.

Six and eightpence, please. Who wants your opinion? Let us drink our
pints in peace. Gob, we won't be let even do that much itself.

--Well, good health, Jack, says Ned.

--Good health, Ned, says J. J.

---There he is again, says Joe.

--Where? says Alf.

And begob there he was passing the door with his books under his oxter
and the wife beside him and Corny Kelleher with his wall eye looking in
as they went past, talking to him like a father, trying to sell him a
secondhand coffin.

--How did that Canada swindle case go off? says Joe.

--Remanded, says J. J.

One of the bottlenosed fraternity it was went by the name of James
Wought alias Saphiro alias Spark and Spiro, put an ad in the papers
saying he'd give a passage to Canada for twenty bob. What? Do you see
any green in the white of my eye? Course it was a bloody barney. What?
Swindled them all, skivvies and badhachs from the county Meath, ay, and
his own kidney too. J. J. was telling us there was an ancient Hebrew
Zaretsky or something weeping in the witnessbox with his hat on him,
swearing by the holy Moses he was stuck for two quid.

--Who tried the case? says Joe.

--Recorder, says Ned.

--Poor old sir Frederick, says Alf, you can cod him up to the two eyes.

--Heart as big as a lion, says Ned. Tell him a tale of woe about arrears
of rent and a sick wife and a squad of kids and, faith, he'll dissolve
in tears on the bench.

--Ay, says Alf. Reuben J was bloody lucky he didn't clap him in the dock
the other day for suing poor little Gumley that's minding stones, for
the corporation there near Butt bridge.

And he starts taking off the old recorder letting on to cry:

--A most scandalous thing! This poor hardworking man! How many children?
Ten, did you say?

--Yes, your worship. And my wife has the typhoid.

--And the wife with typhoid fever! Scandalous! Leave the court
immediately, sir. No, sir, I'll make no order for payment. How dare you,
sir, come up before me and ask me to make an order! A poor hardworking
industrious man! I dismiss the case.

And whereas on the sixteenth day of the month of the oxeyed goddess and
in the third week after the feastday of the Holy and Undivided Trinity,
the daughter of the skies, the virgin moon being then in her first
quarter, it came to pass that those learned judges repaired them to the
halls of law. There master Courtenay, sitting in his own chamber, gave
his rede and master Justice Andrews, sitting without a jury in the
probate court, weighed well and pondered the claim of the first
chargeant upon the property in the matter of the will propounded and
final testamentary disposition _in re_ the real and personal estate of
the late lamented Jacob Halliday, vintner, deceased, versus Livingstone,
an infant, of unsound mind, and another. And to the solemn court of
Green street there came sir Frederick the Falconer. And he sat him there
about the hour of five o'clock to administer the law of the brehons at
the commission for all that and those parts to be holden in and for the
county of the city of Dublin. And there sat with him the high sinhedrim
of the twelve tribes of Iar, for every tribe one man, of the tribe of
Patrick and of the tribe of Hugh and of the tribe of Owen and of the
tribe of Conn and of the tribe of Oscar and of the tribe of Fergus and
of the tribe of Finn and of the tribe of Dermot and of the tribe of
Cormac and of the tribe of Kevin and of the tribe of Caolte and of the
tribe of Ossian, there being in all twelve good men and true. And he
conjured them by Him who died on rood that they should well and
truly try and true deliverance make in the issue joined between their
sovereign lord the king and the prisoner at the bar and true verdict
give according to the evidence so help them God and kiss the book. And
they rose in their seats, those twelve of Iar, and they swore by
the name of Him Who is from everlasting that they would do His
rightwiseness. And straightway the minions of the law led forth from
their donjon keep one whom the sleuthhounds of justice had apprehended
in consequence of information received. And they shackled him hand and
foot and would take of him ne bail ne mainprise but preferred a charge
against him for he was a malefactor.

--Those are nice things, says the citizen, coming over here to Ireland
filling the country with bugs.

So Bloom lets on he heard nothing and he starts talking with Joe,
telling him he needn't trouble about that little matter till the first
but if he would just say a word to Mr Crawford. And so Joe swore high
and holy by this and by that he'd do the devil and all.

--Because, you see, says Bloom, for an advertisement you must have
repetition. That's the whole secret.

--Rely on me, says Joe.

--Swindling the peasants, says the citizen, and the poor of Ireland. We
want no more strangers in our house.

--O, I'm sure that will be all right, Hynes, says Bloom. It's just that
Keyes, you see.

--Consider that done, says Joe.

--Very kind of you, says Bloom.

--The strangers, says the citizen. Our own fault. We let them come in.
We brought them in. The adulteress and her paramour brought the Saxon
robbers here.

--Decree _nisi,_ says J. J.

And Bloom letting on to be awfully deeply interested in nothing, a
spider's web in the corner behind the barrel, and the citizen scowling
after him and the old dog at his feet looking up to know who to bite and
when.

--A dishonoured wife, says the citizen, that's what's the cause of all
our misfortunes.

--And here she is, says Alf, that was giggling over the _Police Gazette_
with Terry on the counter, in all her warpaint.

--Give us a squint at her, says I.

And what was it only one of the smutty yankee pictures Terry borrows off
of Corny Kelleher. Secrets for enlarging your private parts. Misconduct
of society belle. Norman W. Tupper, wealthy Chicago contractor, finds
pretty but faithless wife in lap of officer Taylor. Belle in her
bloomers misconducting herself, and her fancyman feeling for her tickles
and Norman W. Tupper bouncing in with his peashooter just in time to be
late after she doing the trick of the loop with officer Taylor.

--O jakers, Jenny, says Joe, how short your shirt is!

--There's hair, Joe, says I. Get a queer old tailend of corned beef off
of that one, what?

So anyhow in came John Wyse Nolan and Lenehan with him with a face on
him as long as a late breakfast.

--Well, says the citizen, what's the latest from the scene of action?
What did those tinkers in the city hall at their caucus meeting decide
about the Irish language?

O'Nolan, clad in shining armour, low bending made obeisance to the
puissant and high and mighty chief of all Erin and did him to wit of
that which had befallen, how that the grave elders of the most obedient
city, second of the realm, had met them in the tholsel, and there, after
due prayers to the gods who dwell in ether supernal, had taken solemn
counsel whereby they might, if so be it might be, bring once more into
honour among mortal men the winged speech of the seadivided Gael.

--It's on the march, says the citizen. To hell with the bloody brutal
Sassenachs and their _patois._

So J. J. puts in a word, doing the toff about one story was good till
you heard another and blinking facts and the Nelson policy, putting your
blind eye to the telescope and drawing up a bill of attainder to impeach
a nation, and Bloom trying to back him up moderation and botheration and
their colonies and their civilisation.

--Their syphilisation, you mean, says the citizen. To hell with
them! The curse of a goodfornothing God light sideways on the bloody
thicklugged sons of whores' gets! No music and no art and no literature
worthy of the name. Any civilisation they have they stole from us.
Tonguetied sons of bastards' ghosts.

--The European family, says J. J....

--They're not European, says the citizen. I was in Europe with Kevin
Egan of Paris. You wouldn't see a trace of them or their language
anywhere in Europe except in a _cabinet d'aisance._

And says John Wyse:

--Full many a flower is born to blush unseen.

And says Lenehan that knows a bit of the lingo:

--_Conspuez les Anglais! Perfide Albion!_

He said and then lifted he in his rude great brawny strengthy hands the
medher of dark strong foamy ale and, uttering his tribal slogan _Lamh
Dearg Abu_, he drank to the undoing of his foes, a race of mighty
valorous heroes, rulers of the waves, who sit on thrones of alabaster
silent as the deathless gods.

--What's up with you, says I to Lenehan. You look like a fellow that had
lost a bob and found a tanner.

--Gold cup, says he.

--Who won, Mr Lenehan? says Terry.

_--Throwaway,_ says he, at twenty to one. A rank outsider. And the rest
nowhere.

--And Bass's mare? says Terry.

--Still running, says he. We're all in a cart. Boylan plunged two quid
on my tip _Sceptre_ for himself and a lady friend.

--I had half a crown myself, says Terry, on _Zinfandel_ that Mr Flynn
gave me. Lord Howard de Walden's.

--Twenty to one, says Lenehan. Such is life in an outhouse. _Throwaway,_
says he. Takes the biscuit, and talking about bunions. Frailty, thy name
is _Sceptre._

So he went over to the biscuit tin Bob Doran left to see if there was
anything he could lift on the nod, the old cur after him backing his
luck with his mangy snout up. Old Mother Hubbard went to the cupboard.

--Not there, my child, says he.

--Keep your pecker up, says Joe. She'd have won the money only for the
other dog.

And J. J. and the citizen arguing about law and history with Bloom
sticking in an odd word.

--Some people, says Bloom, can see the mote in others' eyes but they
can't see the beam in their own.

--_Raimeis_, says the citizen. There's no-one as blind as the fellow
that won't see, if you know what that means. Where are our missing
twenty millions of Irish should be here today instead of four, our lost
tribes? And our potteries and textiles, the finest in the whole world!
And our wool that was sold in Rome in the time of Juvenal and our flax
and our damask from the looms of Antrim and our Limerick lace, our
tanneries and our white flint glass down there by Ballybough and our
Huguenot poplin that we have since Jacquard de Lyon and our woven silk
and our Foxford tweeds and ivory raised point from the Carmelite convent
in New Ross, nothing like it in the whole wide world. Where are the
Greek merchants that came through the pillars of Hercules, the Gibraltar
now grabbed by the foe of mankind, with gold and Tyrian purple to
sell in Wexford at the fair of Carmen? Read Tacitus and Ptolemy, even
Giraldus Cambrensis. Wine, peltries, Connemara marble, silver from
Tipperary, second to none, our farfamed horses even today, the Irish
hobbies, with king Philip of Spain offering to pay customs duties for
the right to fish in our waters. What do the yellowjohns of Anglia owe
us for our ruined trade and our ruined hearths? And the beds of the
Barrow and Shannon they won't deepen with millions of acres of marsh and
bog to make us all die of consumption?

--As treeless as Portugal we'll be soon, says John Wyse, or Heligoland
with its one tree if something is not done to reafforest the land.
Larches, firs, all the trees of the conifer family are going fast. I was
reading a report of lord Castletown's...

--Save them, says the citizen, the giant ash of Galway and the chieftain
elm of Kildare with a fortyfoot bole and an acre of foliage. Save the
trees of Ireland for the future men of Ireland on the fair hills of
Eire, O.

--Europe has its eyes on you, says Lenehan.

The fashionable international world attended EN MASSE this afternoon
at the wedding of the chevalier Jean Wyse de Neaulan, grand high chief
ranger of the Irish National Foresters, with Miss Fir Conifer of Pine
Valley. Lady Sylvester Elmshade, Mrs Barbara Lovebirch, Mrs Poll Ash,
Mrs Holly Hazeleyes, Miss Daphne Bays, Miss Dorothy Canebrake, Mrs Clyde
Twelvetrees, Mrs Rowan Greene, Mrs Helen Vinegadding, Miss Virginia
Creeper, Miss Gladys Beech, Miss Olive Garth, Miss Blanche Maple, Mrs
Maud Mahogany, Miss Myra Myrtle, Miss Priscilla Elderflower, Miss
Bee Honeysuckle, Miss Grace Poplar, Miss O Mimosa San, Miss Rachel
Cedarfrond, the Misses Lilian and Viola Lilac, Miss Timidity Aspenall,
Mrs Kitty Dewey-Mosse, Miss May Hawthorne, Mrs Gloriana Palme, Mrs Liana
Forrest, Mrs Arabella Blackwood and Mrs Norma Holyoake of Oakholme Regis
graced the ceremony by their presence. The bride who was given away by
her father, the M'Conifer of the Glands, looked exquisitely charming in
a creation carried out in green mercerised silk, moulded on an underslip
of gloaming grey, sashed with a yoke of broad emerald and finished with
a triple flounce of darkerhued fringe, the scheme being relieved by
bretelles and hip insertions of acorn bronze. The maids of honour, Miss
Larch Conifer and Miss Spruce Conifer, sisters of the bride, wore very
becoming costumes in the same tone, a dainty _motif_ of plume rose being
worked into the pleats in a pinstripe and repeated capriciously in the
jadegreen toques in the form of heron feathers of paletinted coral.
Senhor Enrique Flor presided at the organ with his wellknown ability
and, in addition to the prescribed numbers of the nuptial mass, played
a new and striking arrangement of _Woodman, spare that tree_ at the
conclusion of the service. On leaving the church of Saint Fiacre _in
Horto_ after the papal blessing the happy pair were subjected to a
playful crossfire of hazelnuts, beechmast, bayleaves, catkins of willow,
ivytod, hollyberries, mistletoe sprigs and quicken shoots. Mr and Mrs
Wyse Conifer Neaulan will spend a quiet honeymoon in the Black Forest.

--And our eyes are on Europe, says the citizen. We had our trade with
Spain and the French and with the Flemings before those mongrels were
pupped, Spanish ale in Galway, the winebark on the winedark waterway.

--And will again, says Joe.

--And with the help of the holy mother of God we will again, says the
citizen, clapping his thigh, our harbours that are empty will be full
again, Queenstown, Kinsale, Galway, Blacksod Bay, Ventry in the kingdom
of Kerry, Killybegs, the third largest harbour in the wide world with
a fleet of masts of the Galway Lynches and the Cavan O'Reillys and the
O'Kennedys of Dublin when the earl of Desmond could make a treaty with
the emperor Charles the Fifth himself. And will again, says he, when the
first Irish battleship is seen breasting the waves with our own flag to
the fore, none of your Henry Tudor's harps, no, the oldest flag afloat,
the flag of the province of Desmond and Thomond, three crowns on a blue
field, the three sons of Milesius.

And he took the last swig out of the pint. Moya. All wind and piss like
a tanyard cat. Cows in Connacht have long horns. As much as his bloody
life is worth to go down and address his tall talk to the assembled
multitude in Shanagolden where he daren't show his nose with the Molly
Maguires looking for him to let daylight through him for grabbing the
holding of an evicted tenant.

--Hear, hear to that, says John Wyse. What will you have?

--An imperial yeomanry, says Lenehan, to celebrate the occasion.

--Half one, Terry, says John Wyse, and a hands up. Terry! Are you
asleep?

--Yes, sir, says Terry. Small whisky and bottle of Allsop. Right, sir.

Hanging over the bloody paper with Alf looking for spicy bits instead of
attending to the general public. Picture of a butting match, trying to
crack their bloody skulls, one chap going for the other with his head
down like a bull at a gate. And another one: _Black Beast Burned in
Omaha, Ga_. A lot of Deadwood Dicks in slouch hats and they firing at a
Sambo strung up in a tree with his tongue out and a bonfire under
him. Gob, they ought to drown him in the sea after and electrocute and
crucify him to make sure of their job.

--But what about the fighting navy, says Ned, that keeps our foes at
bay?

--I'll tell you what about it, says the citizen. Hell upon earth it is.
Read the revelations that's going on in the papers about flogging on
the training ships at Portsmouth. A fellow writes that calls himself
_Disgusted One_.

So he starts telling us about corporal punishment and about the crew
of tars and officers and rearadmirals drawn up in cocked hats and the
parson with his protestant bible to witness punishment and a young lad
brought out, howling for his ma, and they tie him down on the buttend of
a gun.

--A rump and dozen, says the citizen, was what that old ruffian sir John
Beresford called it but the modern God's Englishman calls it caning on
the breech.

And says John Wyse:

--'Tis a custom more honoured in the breach than in the observance.

Then he was telling us the master at arms comes along with a long cane
and he draws out and he flogs the bloody backside off of the poor lad
till he yells meila murder.

--That's your glorious British navy, says the citizen, that bosses the
earth.

The fellows that never will be slaves, with the only hereditary chamber
on the face of God's earth and their land in the hands of a dozen
gamehogs and cottonball barons. That's the great empire they boast about
of drudges and whipped serfs.

--On which the sun never rises, says Joe.

--And the tragedy of it is, says the citizen, they believe it. The
unfortunate yahoos believe it.

They believe in rod, the scourger almighty, creator of hell upon earth,
and in Jacky Tar, the son of a gun, who was conceived of unholy boast,
born of the fighting navy, suffered under rump and dozen, was scarified,
flayed and curried, yelled like bloody hell, the third day he arose
again from the bed, steered into haven, sitteth on his beamend till
further orders whence he shall come to drudge for a living and be paid.

--But, says Bloom, isn't discipline the same everywhere. I mean wouldn't
it be the same here if you put force against force?

Didn't I tell you? As true as I'm drinking this porter if he was at his
last gasp he'd try to downface you that dying was living.

--We'll put force against force, says the citizen. We have our greater
Ireland beyond the sea. They were driven out of house and home in the
black 47. Their mudcabins and their shielings by the roadside were laid
low by the batteringram and the _Times_ rubbed its hands and told the
whitelivered Saxons there would soon be as few Irish in Ireland as
redskins in America. Even the Grand Turk sent us his piastres. But the
Sassenach tried to starve the nation at home while the land was full
of crops that the British hyenas bought and sold in Rio de Janeiro. Ay,
they drove out the peasants in hordes. Twenty thousand of them died in
the coffinships. But those that came to the land of the free remember
the land of bondage. And they will come again and with a vengeance, no
cravens, the sons of Granuaile, the champions of Kathleen ni Houlihan.

--Perfectly true, says Bloom. But my point was...

--We are a long time waiting for that day, citizen, says Ned. Since the
poor old woman told us that the French were on the sea and landed at
Killala.

--Ay, says John Wyse. We fought for the royal Stuarts that reneged us
against the Williamites and they betrayed us. Remember Limerick and the
broken treatystone. We gave our best blood to France and Spain, the
wild geese. Fontenoy, eh? And Sarsfield and O'Donnell, duke of Tetuan
in Spain, and Ulysses Browne of Camus that was fieldmarshal to Maria
Teresa. But what did we ever get for it?

--The French! says the citizen. Set of dancing masters! Do you know
what it is? They were never worth a roasted fart to Ireland. Aren't they
trying to make an _Entente cordiale_ now at Tay Pay's dinnerparty with
perfidious Albion? Firebrands of Europe and they always were.

--_Conspuez les FranÃ§ais_, says Lenehan, nobbling his beer.

--And as for the Prooshians and the Hanoverians, says Joe, haven't we
had enough of those sausageeating bastards on the throne from George the
elector down to the German lad and the flatulent old bitch that's dead?

Jesus, I had to laugh at the way he came out with that about the old one
with the winkers on her, blind drunk in her royal palace every night of
God, old Vic, with her jorum of mountain dew and her coachman carting
her up body and bones to roll into bed and she pulling him by the
whiskers and singing him old bits of songs about _Ehren on the Rhine_
and come where the boose is cheaper.

--Well, says J. J. We have Edward the peacemaker now.

--Tell that to a fool, says the citizen. There's a bloody sight more pox
than pax about that boyo. Edward Guelph-Wettin!

--And what do you think, says Joe, of the holy boys, the priests
and bishops of Ireland doing up his room in Maynooth in His Satanic
Majesty's racing colours and sticking up pictures of all the horses his
jockeys rode. The earl of Dublin, no less.

--They ought to have stuck up all the women he rode himself, says little
Alf.

And says J. J.:

--Considerations of space influenced their lordships' decision.

--Will you try another, citizen? says Joe.

--Yes, sir, says he. I will.

--You? says Joe.

--Beholden to you, Joe, says I. May your shadow never grow less.

--Repeat that dose, says Joe.

Bloom was talking and talking with John Wyse and he quite excited with
his dunducketymudcoloured mug on him and his old plumeyes rolling about.

--Persecution, says he, all the history of the world is full of it.
Perpetuating national hatred among nations.

--But do you know what a nation means? says John Wyse.

--Yes, says Bloom.

--What is it? says John Wyse.

--A nation? says Bloom. A nation is the same people living in the same
place.

--By God, then, says Ned, laughing, if that's so I'm a nation for I'm
living in the same place for the past five years.

So of course everyone had the laugh at Bloom and says he, trying to muck
out of it:

--Or also living in different places.

--That covers my case, says Joe.

--What is your nation if I may ask? says the citizen.

--Ireland, says Bloom. I was born here. Ireland.

The citizen said nothing only cleared the spit out of his gullet and,
gob, he spat a Red bank oyster out of him right in the corner.

--After you with the push, Joe, says he, taking out his handkerchief to
swab himself dry.

--Here you are, citizen, says Joe. Take that in your right hand and
repeat after me the following words.

The muchtreasured and intricately embroidered ancient Irish facecloth
attributed to Solomon of Droma and Manus Tomaltach og MacDonogh, authors
of the Book of Ballymote, was then carefully produced and called forth
prolonged admiration. No need to dwell on the legendary beauty of the
cornerpieces, the acme of art, wherein one can distinctly discern each
of the four evangelists in turn presenting to each of the four masters
his evangelical symbol, a bogoak sceptre, a North American puma (a far
nobler king of beasts than the British article, be it said in passing),
a Kerry calf and a golden eagle from Carrantuohill. The scenes depicted
on the emunctory field, showing our ancient duns and raths and cromlechs
and grianauns and seats of learning and maledictive stones, are as
wonderfully beautiful and the pigments as delicate as when the Sligo
illuminators gave free rein to their artistic fantasy long long ago in
the time of the Barmecides. Glendalough, the lovely lakes of Killarney,
the ruins of Clonmacnois, Cong Abbey, Glen Inagh and the Twelve Pins,
Ireland's Eye, the Green Hills of Tallaght, Croagh Patrick, the brewery
of Messrs Arthur Guinness, Son and Company (Limited), Lough Neagh's
banks, the vale of Ovoca, Isolde's tower, the Mapas obelisk, Sir Patrick
Dun's hospital, Cape Clear, the glen of Aherlow, Lynch's castle, the
Scotch house, Rathdown Union Workhouse at Loughlinstown, Tullamore jail,
Castleconnel rapids, Kilballymacshonakill, the cross at Monasterboice,
Jury's Hotel, S. Patrick's Purgatory, the Salmon Leap, Maynooth college
refectory, Curley's hole, the three birthplaces of the first duke of
Wellington, the rock of Cashel, the bog of Allen, the Henry Street
Warehouse, Fingal's Cave--all these moving scenes are still there for us
today rendered more beautiful still by the waters of sorrow which have
passed over them and by the rich incrustations of time.

--Show us over the drink, says I. Which is which?

--That's mine, says Joe, as the devil said to the dead policeman.

--And I belong to a race too, says Bloom, that is hated and persecuted.
Also now. This very moment. This very instant.

Gob, he near burnt his fingers with the butt of his old cigar.

--Robbed, says he. Plundered. Insulted. Persecuted. Taking what belongs
to us by right. At this very moment, says he, putting up his fist, sold
by auction in Morocco like slaves or cattle.

--Are you talking about the new Jerusalem? says the citizen.

--I'm talking about injustice, says Bloom.

--Right, says John Wyse. Stand up to it then with force like men.

That's an almanac picture for you. Mark for a softnosed bullet. Old
lardyface standing up to the business end of a gun. Gob, he'd adorn a
sweepingbrush, so he would, if he only had a nurse's apron on him. And
then he collapses all of a sudden, twisting around all the opposite, as
limp as a wet rag.

--But it's no use, says he. Force, hatred, history, all that. That's not
life for men and women, insult and hatred. And everybody knows that it's
the very opposite of that that is really life.

--What? says Alf.

--Love, says Bloom. I mean the opposite of hatred. I must go now, says
he to John Wyse. Just round to the court a moment to see if Martin is
there. If he comes just say I'll be back in a second. Just a moment.

Who's hindering you? And off he pops like greased lightning.

--A new apostle to the gentiles, says the citizen. Universal love.

--Well, says John Wyse. Isn't that what we're told. Love your neighbour.

--That chap? says the citizen. Beggar my neighbour is his motto. Love,
moya! He's a nice pattern of a Romeo and Juliet.

Love loves to love love. Nurse loves the new chemist. Constable 14A
loves Mary Kelly. Gerty MacDowell loves the boy that has the bicycle. M.
B. loves a fair gentleman. Li Chi Han lovey up kissy Cha Pu Chow. Jumbo,
the elephant, loves Alice, the elephant. Old Mr Verschoyle with the ear
trumpet loves old Mrs Verschoyle with the turnedin eye. The man in the
brown macintosh loves a lady who is dead. His Majesty the King loves Her
Majesty the Queen. Mrs Norman W. Tupper loves officer Taylor. You love
a certain person. And this person loves that other person because
everybody loves somebody but God loves everybody.

--Well, Joe, says I, your very good health and song. More power,
citizen.

--Hurrah, there, says Joe.

--The blessing of God and Mary and Patrick on you, says the citizen.

And he ups with his pint to wet his whistle.

--We know those canters, says he, preaching and picking your pocket.
What about sanctimonious Cromwell and his ironsides that put the women
and children of Drogheda to the sword with the bible text _God is love_
pasted round the mouth of his cannon? The bible! Did you read that skit
in the _United Irishman_ today about that Zulu chief that's visiting
England?

--What's that? says Joe.

So the citizen takes up one of his paraphernalia papers and he starts
reading out:

--A delegation of the chief cotton magnates of Manchester was presented
yesterday to His Majesty the Alaki of Abeakuta by Gold Stick in Waiting,
Lord Walkup of Walkup on Eggs, to tender to His Majesty the heartfelt
thanks of British traders for the facilities afforded them in his
dominions. The delegation partook of luncheon at the conclusion of which
the dusky potentate, in the course of a happy speech, freely translated
by the British chaplain, the reverend Ananias Praisegod Barebones,
tendered his best thanks to Massa Walkup and emphasised the cordial
relations existing between Abeakuta and the British empire, stating that
he treasured as one of his dearest possessions an illuminated bible,
the volume of the word of God and the secret of England's greatness,
graciously presented to him by the white chief woman, the great squaw
Victoria, with a personal dedication from the august hand of the Royal
Donor. The Alaki then drank a lovingcup of firstshot usquebaugh to the
toast _Black and White_ from the skull of his immediate predecessor in
the dynasty Kakachakachak, surnamed Forty Warts, after which he visited
the chief factory of Cottonopolis and signed his mark in the visitors'
book, subsequently executing a charming old Abeakutic wardance, in the
course of which he swallowed several knives and forks, amid hilarious
applause from the girl hands.

--Widow woman, says Ned. I wouldn't doubt her. Wonder did he put that
bible to the same use as I would.

--Same only more so, says Lenehan. And thereafter in that fruitful land
the broadleaved mango flourished exceedingly.

--Is that by Griffith? says John Wyse.

--No, says the citizen. It's not signed Shanganagh. It's only
initialled: P.

--And a very good initial too, says Joe.

--That's how it's worked, says the citizen. Trade follows the flag.

--Well, says J. J., if they're any worse than those Belgians in the
Congo Free State they must be bad. Did you read that report by a man
what's this his name is?

--Casement, says the citizen. He's an Irishman.

--Yes, that's the man, says J. J. Raping the women and girls and
flogging the natives on the belly to squeeze all the red rubber they can
out of them.

--I know where he's gone, says Lenehan, cracking his fingers.

--Who? says I.

--Bloom, says he. The courthouse is a blind. He had a few bob on
_Throwaway_ and he's gone to gather in the shekels.

--Is it that whiteeyed kaffir? says the citizen, that never backed a
horse in anger in his life?

--That's where he's gone, says Lenehan. I met Bantam Lyons going to back
that horse only I put him off it and he told me Bloom gave him the tip.
Bet you what you like he has a hundred shillings to five on. He's the
only man in Dublin has it. A dark horse.

--He's a bloody dark horse himself, says Joe.

--Mind, Joe, says I. Show us the entrance out.

--There you are, says Terry.

Goodbye Ireland I'm going to Gort. So I just went round the back of
the yard to pumpship and begob (hundred shillings to five) while I was
letting off my _(Throwaway_ twenty to) letting off my load gob says I
to myself I knew he was uneasy in his (two pints off of Joe and one in
Slattery's off) in his mind to get off the mark to (hundred shillings
is five quid) and when they were in the (dark horse) pisser Burke was
telling me card party and letting on the child was sick (gob, must have
done about a gallon) flabbyarse of a wife speaking down the tube _she's
better_ or _she's_ (ow!) all a plan so he could vamoose with the pool if
he won or (Jesus, full up I was) trading without a licence (ow!) Ireland
my nation says he (hoik! phthook!) never be up to those bloody (there's
the last of it) Jerusalem (ah!) cuckoos.

So anyhow when I got back they were at it dingdong, John Wyse saying it
was Bloom gave the ideas for Sinn Fein to Griffith to put in his paper
all kinds of jerrymandering, packed juries and swindling the taxes off
of the government and appointing consuls all over the world to walk
about selling Irish industries. Robbing Peter to pay Paul. Gob, that
puts the bloody kybosh on it if old sloppy eyes is mucking up the show.
Give us a bloody chance. God save Ireland from the likes of that bloody
mouseabout. Mr Bloom with his argol bargol. And his old fellow before
him perpetrating frauds, old Methusalem Bloom, the robbing bagman, that
poisoned himself with the prussic acid after he swamping the country
with his baubles and his penny diamonds. Loans by post on easy terms.
Any amount of money advanced on note of hand. Distance no object. No
security. Gob, he's like Lanty MacHale's goat that'd go a piece of the
road with every one.

--Well, it's a fact, says John Wyse. And there's the man now that'll
tell you all about it, Martin Cunningham.

Sure enough the castle car drove up with Martin on it and Jack Power
with him and a fellow named Crofter or Crofton, pensioner out of
the collector general's, an orangeman Blackburn does have on the
registration and he drawing his pay or Crawford gallivanting around the
country at the king's expense.

Our travellers reached the rustic hostelry and alighted from their
palfreys.

--Ho, varlet! cried he, who by his mien seemed the leader of the party.
Saucy knave! To us!

So saying he knocked loudly with his swordhilt upon the open lattice.

Mine host came forth at the summons, girding him with his tabard.

--Give you good den, my masters, said he with an obsequious bow.

--Bestir thyself, sirrah! cried he who had knocked. Look to our steeds.
And for ourselves give us of your best for ifaith we need it.

--Lackaday, good masters, said the host, my poor house has but a bare
larder. I know not what to offer your lordships.

--How now, fellow? cried the second of the party, a man of pleasant
countenance, So servest thou the king's messengers, master Taptun?

An instantaneous change overspread the landlord's visage.

--Cry you mercy, gentlemen, he said humbly. An you be the king's
messengers (God shield His Majesty!) you shall not want for aught. The
king's friends (God bless His Majesty!) shall not go afasting in my
house I warrant me.

--Then about! cried the traveller who had not spoken, a lusty
trencherman by his aspect. Hast aught to give us?

Mine host bowed again as he made answer:

--What say you, good masters, to a squab pigeon pasty, some collops of
venison, a saddle of veal, widgeon with crisp hog's bacon, a boar's head
with pistachios, a bason of jolly custard, a medlar tansy and a flagon
of old Rhenish?

--Gadzooks! cried the last speaker. That likes me well. Pistachios!

--Aha! cried he of the pleasant countenance. A poor house and a bare
larder, quotha! 'Tis a merry rogue.

So in comes Martin asking where was Bloom.

--Where is he? says Lenehan. Defrauding widows and orphans.

--Isn't that a fact, says John Wyse, what I was telling the citizen
about Bloom and the Sinn Fein?

--That's so, says Martin. Or so they allege.

--Who made those allegations? says Alf.

--I, says Joe. I'm the alligator.

--And after all, says John Wyse, why can't a jew love his country like
the next fellow?

--Why not? says J. J., when he's quite sure which country it is.

--Is he a jew or a gentile or a holy Roman or a swaddler or what the
hell is he? says Ned. Or who is he? No offence, Crofton.

--Who is Junius? says J. J.

--We don't want him, says Crofter the Orangeman or presbyterian.

--He's a perverted jew, says Martin, from a place in Hungary and it was
he drew up all the plans according to the Hungarian system. We know that
in the castle.

--Isn't he a cousin of Bloom the dentist? says Jack Power.

--Not at all, says Martin. Only namesakes. His name was Virag, the
father's name that poisoned himself. He changed it by deedpoll, the
father did.

--That's the new Messiah for Ireland! says the citizen. Island of saints
and sages!

--Well, they're still waiting for their redeemer, says Martin. For that
matter so are we.

--Yes, says J. J., and every male that's born they think it may be their
Messiah. And every jew is in a tall state of excitement, I believe, till
he knows if he's a father or a mother.

--Expecting every moment will be his next, says Lenehan.

--O, by God, says Ned, you should have seen Bloom before that son of his
that died was born. I met him one day in the south city markets buying a
tin of Neave's food six weeks before the wife was delivered.

--_En ventre sa mÃ¨re_, says J. J.

--Do you call that a man? says the citizen.

--I wonder did he ever put it out of sight, says Joe.

--Well, there were two children born anyhow, says Jack Power.

--And who does he suspect? says the citizen.

Gob, there's many a true word spoken in jest. One of those mixed
middlings he is. Lying up in the hotel Pisser was telling me once a
month with headache like a totty with her courses. Do you know what I'm
telling you? It'd be an act of God to take a hold of a fellow the like
of that and throw him in the bloody sea. Justifiable homicide, so it
would. Then sloping off with his five quid without putting up a pint of
stuff like a man. Give us your blessing. Not as much as would blind your
eye.

--Charity to the neighbour, says Martin. But where is he? We can't wait.

--A wolf in sheep's clothing, says the citizen. That's what he is. Virag
from Hungary! Ahasuerus I call him. Cursed by God.

--Have you time for a brief libation, Martin? says Ned.

--Only one, says Martin. We must be quick. J. J. and S.

--You, Jack? Crofton? Three half ones, Terry.

--Saint Patrick would want to land again at Ballykinlar and convert us,
says the citizen, after allowing things like that to contaminate our
shores.

--Well, says Martin, rapping for his glass. God bless all here is my
prayer.

--Amen, says the citizen.

--And I'm sure He will, says Joe.

And at the sound of the sacring bell, headed by a crucifer with
acolytes, thurifers, boatbearers, readers, ostiarii, deacons and
subdeacons, the blessed company drew nigh of mitred abbots and priors
and guardians and monks and friars: the monks of Benedict of Spoleto,
Carthusians and Camaldolesi, Cistercians and Olivetans, Oratorians
and Vallombrosans, and the friars of Augustine, Brigittines,
Premonstratensians, Servi, Trinitarians, and the children of Peter
Nolasco: and therewith from Carmel mount the children of Elijah prophet
led by Albert bishop and by Teresa of Avila, calced and other: and
friars, brown and grey, sons of poor Francis, capuchins, cordeliers,
minimes and observants and the daughters of Clara: and the sons of
Dominic, the friars preachers, and the sons of Vincent: and the monks
of S. Wolstan: and Ignatius his children: and the confraternity of the
christian brothers led by the reverend brother Edmund Ignatius Rice. And
after came all saints and martyrs, virgins and confessors: S. Cyr and
S. Isidore Arator and S. James the Less and S. Phocas of Sinope and S.
Julian Hospitator and S. Felix de Cantalice and S. Simon Stylites and
S. Stephen Protomartyr and S. John of God and S. Ferreol and S. Leugarde
and S. Theodotus and S. Vulmar and S. Richard and S. Vincent de Paul and
S. Martin of Todi and S. Martin of Tours and S. Alfred and S. Joseph and
S. Denis and S. Cornelius and S. Leopold and S. Bernard and S. Terence
and S. Edward and S. Owen Caniculus and S. Anonymous and S. Eponymous
and S. Pseudonymous and S. Homonymous and S. Paronymous and S.
Synonymous and S. Laurence O'Toole and S. James of Dingle and
Compostella and S. Columcille and S. Columba and S. Celestine and S.
Colman and S. Kevin and S. Brendan and S. Frigidian and S. Senan and S.
Fachtna and S. Columbanus and S. Gall and S. Fursey and S. Fintan and S.
Fiacre and S. John Nepomuc and S. Thomas Aquinas and S. Ives of Brittany
and S. Michan and S. Herman-Joseph and the three patrons of holy youth
S. Aloysius Gonzaga and S. Stanislaus Kostka and S. John Berchmans
and the saints Gervasius, Servasius and Bonifacius and S. Bride and S.
Kieran and S. Canice of Kilkenny and S. Jarlath of Tuam and S. Finbarr
and S. Pappin of Ballymun and Brother Aloysius Pacificus and Brother
Louis Bellicosus and the saints Rose of Lima and of Viterbo and S.
Martha of Bethany and S. Mary of Egypt and S. Lucy and S. Brigid and
S. Attracta and S. Dympna and S. Ita and S. Marion Calpensis and
the Blessed Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus and S. Barbara and S.
Scholastica and S. Ursula with eleven thousand virgins. And all came
with nimbi and aureoles and gloriae, bearing palms and harps and swords
and olive crowns, in robes whereon were woven the blessed symbols of
their efficacies, inkhorns, arrows, loaves, cruses, fetters, axes,
trees, bridges, babes in a bathtub, shells, wallets, shears, keys,
dragons, lilies, buckshot, beards, hogs, lamps, bellows, beehives,
soupladles, stars, snakes, anvils, boxes of vaseline, bells, crutches,
forceps, stags' horns, watertight boots, hawks, millstones, eyes on a
dish, wax candles, aspergills, unicorns. And as they wended their way by
Nelson's Pillar, Henry street, Mary street, Capel street, Little Britain
street chanting the introit in _Epiphania Domini_ which beginneth
_Surge, illuminare_ and thereafter most sweetly the gradual _Omnes_
which saith _de Saba venient_ they did divers wonders such as casting
out devils, raising the dead to life, multiplying fishes, healing the
halt and the blind, discovering various articles which had been mislaid,
interpreting and fulfilling the scriptures, blessing and prophesying.
And last, beneath a canopy of cloth of gold came the reverend Father
O'Flynn attended by Malachi and Patrick. And when the good fathers
had reached the appointed place, the house of Bernard Kiernan and Co,
limited, 8, 9 and 10 little Britain street, wholesale grocers, wine
and brandy shippers, licensed fo the sale of beer, wine and spirits for
consumption on the premises, the celebrant blessed the house and censed
the mullioned windows and the groynes and the vaults and the arrises and
the capitals and the pediments and the cornices and the engrailed arches
and the spires and the cupolas and sprinkled the lintels thereof with
blessed water and prayed that God might bless that house as he had
blessed the house of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and make the angels of
His light to inhabit therein. And entering he blessed the viands and the
beverages and the company of all the blessed answered his prayers.

--_Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini._

--_Qui fecit coelum et terram._

--_Dominus vobiscum._

--_Et cum spiritu tuo._

And he laid his hands upon that he blessed and gave thanks and he prayed
and they all with him prayed:

--_Deus, cuius verbo sanctificantur omnia, benedictionem tuam effunde
super creaturas istas: et praesta ut quisquis eis secundum legem et
voluntatem Tuam cum gratiarum actione usus fuerit per invocationem
sanctissimi nominis Tui corporis sanitatem et animae tutelam Te auctore
percipiat per Christum Dominum nostrum._

--And so say all of us, says Jack.

--Thousand a year, Lambert, says Crofton or Crawford.

--Right, says Ned, taking up his John Jameson. And butter for fish.

I was just looking around to see who the happy thought would strike when
be damned but in he comes again letting on to be in a hell of a hurry.

--I was just round at the courthouse, says he, looking for you. I hope
I'm not...

--No, says Martin, we're ready.

Courthouse my eye and your pockets hanging down with gold and silver.
Mean bloody scut. Stand us a drink itself. Devil a sweet fear! There's
a jew for you! All for number one. Cute as a shithouse rat. Hundred to
five.

--Don't tell anyone, says the citizen,

--Beg your pardon, says he.

--Come on boys, says Martin, seeing it was looking blue. Come along now.

--Don't tell anyone, says the citizen, letting a bawl out of him. It's a
secret.

And the bloody dog woke up and let a growl.

--Bye bye all, says Martin.

And he got them out as quick as he could, Jack Power and Crofton or
whatever you call him and him in the middle of them letting on to be all
at sea and up with them on the bloody jaunting car.

---Off with you, says

Martin to the jarvey.

The milkwhite dolphin tossed his mane and, rising in the golden poop the
helmsman spread the bellying sail upon the wind and stood off forward
with all sail set, the spinnaker to larboard. A many comely nymphs drew
nigh to starboard and to larboard and, clinging to the sides of
the noble bark, they linked their shining forms as doth the cunning
wheelwright when he fashions about the heart of his wheel the
equidistant rays whereof each one is sister to another and he binds them
all with an outer ring and giveth speed to the feet of men whenas they
ride to a hosting or contend for the smile of ladies fair. Even so did
they come and set them, those willing nymphs, the undying sisters. And
they laughed, sporting in a circle of their foam: and the bark clave the
waves.

But begob I was just lowering the heel of the pint when I saw the
citizen getting up to waddle to the door, puffing and blowing with the
dropsy, and he cursing the curse of Cromwell on him, bell, book and
candle in Irish, spitting and spatting out of him and Joe and little Alf
round him like a leprechaun trying to peacify him.

--Let me alone, says he.

And begob he got as far as the door and they holding him and he bawls
out of him:

--Three cheers for Israel!

Arrah, sit down on the parliamentary side of your arse for Christ' sake
and don't be making a public exhibition of yourself. Jesus, there's
always some bloody clown or other kicking up a bloody murder about
bloody nothing. Gob, it'd turn the porter sour in your guts, so it
would.

And all the ragamuffins and sluts of the nation round the door and
Martin telling the jarvey to drive ahead and the citizen bawling and Alf
and Joe at him to whisht and he on his high horse about the jews and
the loafers calling for a speech and Jack Power trying to get him to sit
down on the car and hold his bloody jaw and a loafer with a patch over
his eye starts singing _If the man in the moon was a jew, jew, jew_ and
a slut shouts out of her:

--Eh, mister! Your fly is open, mister!

And says he:

--Mendelssohn was a jew and Karl Marx and Mercadante and Spinoza. And
the Saviour was a jew and his father was a jew. Your God.

--He had no father, says Martin. That'll do now. Drive ahead.

--Whose God? says the citizen.

--Well, his uncle was a jew, says he. Your God was a jew. Christ was a
jew like me.

Gob, the citizen made a plunge back into the shop.

--By Jesus, says he, I'll brain that bloody jewman for using the holy
name.

By Jesus, I'll crucify him so I will. Give us that biscuitbox here.

--Stop! Stop! says Joe.

A large and appreciative gathering of friends and acquaintances from
the metropolis and greater Dublin assembled in their thousands to bid
farewell to Nagyasagos uram Lipoti Virag, late of Messrs Alexander
Thom's, printers to His Majesty, on the occasion of his departure
for the distant clime of Szazharminczbrojugulyas-Dugulas (Meadow of
Murmuring Waters). The ceremony which went off with great _Ã©clat_ was
characterised by the most affecting cordiality. An illuminated scroll
of ancient Irish vellum, the work of Irish artists, was presented to
the distinguished phenomenologist on behalf of a large section of the
community and was accompanied by the gift of a silver casket, tastefully
executed in the style of ancient Celtic ornament, a work which reflects
every credit on the makers, Messrs Jacob _agus_ Jacob. The departing
guest was the recipient of a hearty ovation, many of those who were
present being visibly moved when the select orchestra of Irish pipes
struck up the wellknown strains of _Come back to Erin_, followed
immediately by _Rakoczsy's March_. Tarbarrels and bonfires were lighted
along the coastline of the four seas on the summits of the Hill of
Howth, Three Rock Mountain, Sugarloaf, Bray Head, the mountains of
Mourne, the Galtees, the Ox and Donegal and Sperrin peaks, the Nagles
and the Bograghs, the Connemara hills, the reeks of M Gillicuddy, Slieve
Aughty, Slieve Bernagh and Slieve Bloom. Amid cheers that rent the
welkin, responded to by answering cheers from a big muster of
henchmen on the distant Cambrian and Caledonian hills, the mastodontic
pleasureship slowly moved away saluted by a final floral tribute from
the representatives of the fair sex who were present in large numbers
while, as it proceeded down the river, escorted by a flotilla of barges,
the flags of the Ballast office and Custom House were dipped in salute
as were also those of the electrical power station at the
Pigeonhouse and the Poolbeg Light. _VisszontlÃ¡tÃ¡sra, kedves barÃ¡ton!
VisszontlÃ¡tÃ¡sra!_ Gone but not forgotten.

Gob, the devil wouldn't stop him till he got hold of the bloody tin
anyhow and out with him and little Alf hanging on to his elbow and he
shouting like a stuck pig, as good as any bloody play in the Queen's
royal theatre:

--Where is he till I murder him?

And Ned and J. J. paralysed with the laughing.

--Bloody wars, says I, I'll be in for the last gospel.

But as luck would have it the jarvey got the nag's head round the other
way and off with him.

--Hold on, citizen, says Joe. Stop!

Begob he drew his hand and made a swipe and let fly. Mercy of God the
sun was in his eyes or he'd have left him for dead. Gob, he near sent it
into the county Longford. The bloody nag took fright and the old
mongrel after the car like bloody hell and all the populace shouting and
laughing and the old tinbox clattering along the street.

The catastrophe was terrific and instantaneous in its effect. The
observatory of Dunsink registered in all eleven shocks, all of the fifth
grade of Mercalli's scale, and there is no record extant of a similar
seismic disturbance in our island since the earthquake of 1534, the year
of the rebellion of Silken Thomas. The epicentre appears to have been
that part of the metropolis which constitutes the Inn's Quay ward and
parish of Saint Michan covering a surface of fortyone acres, two roods
and one square pole or perch. All the lordly residences in the vicinity
of the palace of justice were demolished and that noble edifice itself,
in which at the time of the catastrophe important legal debates were in
progress, is literally a mass of ruins beneath which it is to be
feared all the occupants have been buried alive. From the reports of
eyewitnesses it transpires that the seismic waves were accompanied by
a violent atmospheric perturbation of cyclonic character. An article of
headgear since ascertained to belong to the much respected clerk of the
crown and peace Mr George Fottrell and a silk umbrella with gold handle
with the engraved initials, crest, coat of arms and house number of
the erudite and worshipful chairman of quarter sessions sir Frederick
Falkiner, recorder of Dublin, have been discovered by search parties
in remote parts of the island respectively, the former on the third
basaltic ridge of the giant's causeway, the latter embedded to the
extent of one foot three inches in the sandy beach of Holeopen bay near
the old head of Kinsale. Other eyewitnesses depose that they observed
an incandescent object of enormous proportions hurtling through the
atmosphere at a terrifying velocity in a trajectory directed southwest
by west. Messages of condolence and sympathy are being hourly received
from all parts of the different continents and the sovereign pontiff has
been graciously pleased to decree that a special _missa pro defunctis_
shall be celebrated simultaneously by the ordinaries of each and every
cathedral church of all the episcopal dioceses subject to the spiritual
authority of the Holy See in suffrage of the souls of those faithful
departed who have been so unexpectedly called away from our midst.
The work of salvage, removal of _dÃ©bris,_ human remains etc has been
entrusted to Messrs Michael Meade and Son, 159 Great Brunswick street,
and Messrs T. and C. Martin, 77, 78, 79 and 80 North Wall, assisted by
the men and officers of the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry under the
general supervision of H. R. H., rear admiral, the right honourable sir
Hercules Hannibal Habeas Corpus Anderson, K. G., K. P., K. T., P. C., K.
C. B., M. P, J. P., M. B., D. S. O., S. O. D., M. F. H., M. R. I. A., B.
L., Mus. Doc., P. L. G., F. T. C. D., F. R. U. I., F. R. C. P. I. and F.
R. C. S. I.

You never saw the like of it in all your born puff. Gob, if he got that
lottery ticket on the side of his poll he'd remember the gold cup, he
would so, but begob the citizen would have been lagged for assault and
battery and Joe for aiding and abetting. The jarvey saved his life by
furious driving as sure as God made Moses. What? O, Jesus, he did. And
he let a volley of oaths after him.

--Did I kill him, says he, or what?

And he shouting to the bloody dog:

--After him, Garry! After him, boy!

And the last we saw was the bloody car rounding the corner and old
sheepsface on it gesticulating and the bloody mongrel after it with his
lugs back for all he was bloody well worth to tear him limb from limb.
Hundred to five! Jesus, he took the value of it out of him, I promise
you.

When, lo, there came about them all a great brightness and they beheld
the chariot wherein He stood ascend to heaven. And they beheld Him in
the chariot, clothed upon in the glory of the brightness, having raiment
as of the sun, fair as the moon and terrible that for awe they durst not
look upon Him. And there came a voice out of heaven, calling: _Elijah!
Elijah!_ And He answered with a main cry: _Abba! Adonai!_ And they
beheld Him even Him, ben Bloom Elijah, amid clouds of angels ascend
to the glory of the brightness at an angle of fortyfive degrees over
Donohoe's in Little Green street like a shot off a shovel.



The summer evening had begun to fold the world in its mysterious
embrace. Far away in the west the sun was setting and the last glow of
all too fleeting day lingered lovingly on sea and strand, on the proud
promontory of dear old Howth guarding as ever the waters of the bay, on
the weedgrown rocks along Sandymount shore and, last but not least, on
the quiet church whence there streamed forth at times upon the stillness
the voice of prayer to her who is in her pure radiance a beacon ever to
the stormtossed heart of man, Mary, star of the sea.

The three girl friends were seated on the rocks, enjoying the evening
scene and the air which was fresh but not too chilly. Many a time and
oft were they wont to come there to that favourite nook to have a cosy
chat beside the sparkling waves and discuss matters feminine, Cissy
Caffrey and Edy Boardman with the baby in the pushcar and Tommy and
Jacky Caffrey, two little curlyheaded boys, dressed in sailor suits with
caps to match and the name H.M.S. Belleisle printed on both. For Tommy
and Jacky Caffrey were twins, scarce four years old and very noisy and
spoiled twins sometimes but for all that darling little fellows with
bright merry faces and endearing ways about them. They were dabbling in
the sand with their spades and buckets, building castles as children do,
or playing with their big coloured ball, happy as the day was long. And
Edy Boardman was rocking the chubby baby to and fro in the pushcar while
that young gentleman fairly chuckled with delight. He was but eleven
months and nine days old and, though still a tiny toddler, was just
beginning to lisp his first babyish words. Cissy Caffrey bent over to
him to tease his fat little plucks and the dainty dimple in his chin.

--Now, baby, Cissy Caffrey said. Say out big, big. I want a drink of
water.

And baby prattled after her:

--A jink a jink a jawbo.

Cissy Caffrey cuddled the wee chap for she was awfully fond of children,
so patient with little sufferers and Tommy Caffrey could never be got to
take his castor oil unless it was Cissy Caffrey that held his nose and
promised him the scatty heel of the loaf or brown bread with golden
syrup on. What a persuasive power that girl had! But to be sure baby
Boardman was as good as gold, a perfect little dote in his new fancy
bib. None of your spoilt beauties, Flora MacFlimsy sort, was Cissy
Caffrey. A truerhearted lass never drew the breath of life, always with
a laugh in her gipsylike eyes and a frolicsome word on her cherryripe
red lips, a girl lovable in the extreme. And Edy Boardman laughed too at
the quaint language of little brother.

But just then there was a slight altercation between Master Tommy and
Master Jacky. Boys will be boys and our two twins were no exception
to this golden rule. The apple of discord was a certain castle of sand
which Master Jacky had built and Master Tommy would have it right go
wrong that it was to be architecturally improved by a frontdoor like the
Martello tower had. But if Master Tommy was headstrong Master Jacky was
selfwilled too and, true to the maxim that every little Irishman's house
is his castle, he fell upon his hated rival and to such purpose that the
wouldbe assailant came to grief and (alas to relate!) the coveted castle
too. Needless to say the cries of discomfited Master Tommy drew the
attention of the girl friends.

--Come here, Tommy, his sister called imperatively. At once! And you,
Jacky, for shame to throw poor Tommy in the dirty sand. Wait till I
catch you for that.

His eyes misty with unshed tears Master Tommy came at her call for their
big sister's word was law with the twins. And in a sad plight he was
too after his misadventure. His little man-o'-war top and unmentionables
were full of sand but Cissy was a past mistress in the art of smoothing
over life's tiny troubles and very quickly not one speck of sand was to
be seen on his smart little suit. Still the blue eyes were glistening
with hot tears that would well up so she kissed away the hurtness and
shook her hand at Master Jacky the culprit and said if she was near him
she wouldn't be far from him, her eyes dancing in admonition.

--Nasty bold Jacky! she cried.

She put an arm round the little mariner and coaxed winningly:

--What's your name? Butter and cream?

--Tell us who is your sweetheart, spoke Edy Boardman. Is Cissy your
sweetheart?

--Nao, tearful Tommy said.

--Is Edy Boardman your sweetheart? Cissy queried.

--Nao, Tommy said.

--I know, Edy Boardman said none too amiably with an arch glance from
her shortsighted eyes. I know who is Tommy's sweetheart. Gerty is
Tommy's sweetheart.

--Nao, Tommy said on the verge of tears.

Cissy's quick motherwit guessed what was amiss and she whispered to
Edy Boardman to take him there behind the pushcar where the gentleman
couldn't see and to mind he didn't wet his new tan shoes.

But who was Gerty?

Gerty MacDowell who was seated near her companions, lost in thought,
gazing far away into the distance was, in very truth, as fair a specimen
of winsome Irish girlhood as one could wish to see. She was pronounced
beautiful by all who knew her though, as folks often said, she was
more a Giltrap than a MacDowell. Her figure was slight and graceful,
inclining even to fragility but those iron jelloids she had been taking
of late had done her a world of good much better than the Widow Welch's
female pills and she was much better of those discharges she used to
get and that tired feeling. The waxen pallor of her face was almost
spiritual in its ivorylike purity though her rosebud mouth was a genuine
Cupid's bow, Greekly perfect. Her hands were of finely veined alabaster
with tapering fingers and as white as lemonjuice and queen of ointments
could make them though it was not true that she used to wear kid gloves
in bed or take a milk footbath either. Bertha Supple told that once to
Edy Boardman, a deliberate lie, when she was black out at daggers drawn
with Gerty (the girl chums had of course their little tiffs from time to
time like the rest of mortals) and she told her not to let on whatever
she did that it was her that told her or she'd never speak to her
again. No. Honour where honour is due. There was an innate refinement,
a languid queenly _hauteur_ about Gerty which was unmistakably evidenced
in her delicate hands and higharched instep. Had kind fate but willed
her to be born a gentlewoman of high degree in her own right and had
she only received the benefit of a good education Gerty MacDowell might
easily have held her own beside any lady in the land and have seen
herself exquisitely gowned with jewels on her brow and patrician suitors
at her feet vying with one another to pay their devoirs to her.
Mayhap it was this, the love that might have been, that lent to her
softlyfeatured face at whiles a look, tense with suppressed meaning,
that imparted a strange yearning tendency to the beautiful eyes, a charm
few could resist. Why have women such eyes of witchery? Gerty's were of
the bluest Irish blue, set off by lustrous lashes and dark expressive
brows. Time was when those brows were not so silkily seductive. It
was Madame Vera Verity, directress of the Woman Beautiful page of the
Princess Novelette, who had first advised her to try eyebrowleine which
gave that haunting expression to the eyes, so becoming in leaders
of fashion, and she had never regretted it. Then there was blushing
scientifically cured and how to be tall increase your height and you
have a beautiful face but your nose? That would suit Mrs Dignam because
she had a button one. But Gerty's crowning glory was her wealth of
wonderful hair. It was dark brown with a natural wave in it. She had cut
it that very morning on account of the new moon and it nestled about
her pretty head in a profusion of luxuriant clusters and pared her nails
too, Thursday for wealth. And just now at Edy's words as a telltale
flush, delicate as the faintest rosebloom, crept into her cheeks she
looked so lovely in her sweet girlish shyness that of a surety God's
fair land of Ireland did not hold her equal.

For an instant she was silent with rather sad downcast eyes. She
was about to retort but something checked the words on her tongue.
Inclination prompted her to speak out: dignity told her to be silent.
The pretty lips pouted awhile but then she glanced up and broke out into
a joyous little laugh which had in it all the freshness of a young May
morning. She knew right well, no-one better, what made squinty Edy
say that because of him cooling in his attentions when it was simply a
lovers' quarrel. As per usual somebody's nose was out of joint about the
boy that had the bicycle off the London bridge road always riding up
and down in front of her window. Only now his father kept him in in the
evenings studying hard to get an exhibition in the intermediate that was
on and he was going to go to Trinity college to study for a doctor when
he left the high school like his brother W. E. Wylie who was racing
in the bicycle races in Trinity college university. Little recked he
perhaps for what she felt, that dull aching void in her heart sometimes,
piercing to the core. Yet he was young and perchance he might learn
to love her in time. They were protestants in his family and of course
Gerty knew Who came first and after Him the Blessed Virgin and then
Saint Joseph. But he was undeniably handsome with an exquisite nose and
he was what he looked, every inch a gentleman, the shape of his head too
at the back without his cap on that she would know anywhere something
off the common and the way he turned the bicycle at the lamp with his
hands off the bars and also the nice perfume of those good cigarettes
and besides they were both of a size too he and she and that was why Edy
Boardman thought she was so frightfully clever because he didn't go and
ride up and down in front of her bit of a garden.

Gerty was dressed simply but with the instinctive taste of a votary of
Dame Fashion for she felt that there was just a might that he might be
out. A neat blouse of electric blue selftinted by dolly dyes (because it
was expected in the _Lady's Pictorial_ that electric blue would be worn)
with a smart vee opening down to the division and kerchief pocket (in
which she always kept a piece of cottonwool scented with her
favourite perfume because the handkerchief spoiled the sit) and a navy
threequarter skirt cut to the stride showed off her slim graceful figure
to perfection. She wore a coquettish little love of a hat of wideleaved
nigger straw contrast trimmed with an underbrim of eggblue chenille and
at the side a butterfly bow of silk to tone. All Tuesday week afternoon
she was hunting to match that chenille but at last she found what she
wanted at Clery's summer sales, the very it, slightly shopsoiled but you
would never notice, seven fingers two and a penny. She did it up all by
herself and what joy was hers when she tried it on then, smiling at the
lovely reflection which the mirror gave back to her! And when she put
it on the waterjug to keep the shape she knew that that would take the
shine out of some people she knew. Her shoes were the newest thing in
footwear (Edy Boardman prided herself that she was very _petite_ but she
never had a foot like Gerty MacDowell, a five, and never would ash,
oak or elm) with patent toecaps and just one smart buckle over
her higharched instep. Her wellturned ankle displayed its perfect
proportions beneath her skirt and just the proper amount and no more of
her shapely limbs encased in finespun hose with highspliced heels and
wide garter tops. As for undies they were Gerty's chief care and who
that knows the fluttering hopes and fears of sweet seventeen (though
Gerty would never see seventeen again) can find it in his heart to
blame her? She had four dinky sets with awfully pretty stitchery,
three garments and nighties extra, and each set slotted with different
coloured ribbons, rosepink, pale blue, mauve and peagreen, and she aired
them herself and blued them when they came home from the wash and ironed
them and she had a brickbat to keep the iron on because she wouldn't
trust those washerwomen as far as she'd see them scorching the things.
She was wearing the blue for luck, hoping against hope, her own colour
and lucky too for a bride to have a bit of blue somewhere on her because
the green she wore that day week brought grief because his father
brought him in to study for the intermediate exhibition and because
she thought perhaps he might be out because when she was dressing that
morning she nearly slipped up the old pair on her inside out and that
was for luck and lovers' meeting if you put those things on inside
out or if they got untied that he was thinking about you so long as it
wasn't of a Friday.

And yet and yet! That strained look on her face! A gnawing sorrow is
there all the time. Her very soul is in her eyes and she would give
worlds to be in the privacy of her own familiar chamber where,
giving way to tears, she could have a good cry and relieve her pentup
feelingsthough not too much because she knew how to cry nicely before
the mirror. You are lovely, Gerty, it said. The paly light of evening
falls upon a face infinitely sad and wistful. Gerty MacDowell yearns
in vain. Yes, she had known from the very first that her daydream of a
marriage has been arranged and the weddingbells ringing for Mrs Reggy
Wylie T. C. D. (because the one who married the elder brother would be
Mrs Wylie) and in the fashionable intelligence Mrs Gertrude Wylie was
wearing a sumptuous confection of grey trimmed with expensive blue fox
was not to be. He was too young to understand. He would not believe in
love, a woman's birthright. The night of the party long ago in Stoer's
(he was still in short trousers) when they were alone and he stole
an arm round her waist she went white to the very lips. He called her
little one in a strangely husky voice and snatched a half kiss (the
first!) but it was only the end of her nose and then he hastened from
the room with a remark about refreshments. Impetuous fellow! Strength of
character had never been Reggy Wylie's strong point and he who would
woo and win Gerty MacDowell must be a man among men. But waiting, always
waiting to be asked and it was leap year too and would soon be over. No
prince charming is her beau ideal to lay a rare and wondrous love at her
feet but rather a manly man with a strong quiet face who had not found
his ideal, perhaps his hair slightly flecked with grey, and who would
understand, take her in his sheltering arms, strain her to him in all
the strength of his deep passionate nature and comfort her with a long
long kiss. It would be like heaven. For such a one she yearns this balmy
summer eve. With all the heart of her she longs to be his only, his
affianced bride for riches for poor, in sickness in health, till death
us two part, from this to this day forward.

And while Edy Boardman was with little Tommy behind the pushcar she was
just thinking would the day ever come when she could call herself his
little wife to be. Then they could talk about her till they went blue in
the face, Bertha Supple too, and Edy, little spitfire, because she would
be twentytwo in November. She would care for him with creature comforts
too for Gerty was womanly wise and knew that a mere man liked that
feeling of hominess. Her griddlecakes done to a goldenbrown hue and
queen Ann's pudding of delightful creaminess had won golden opinions
from all because she had a lucky hand also for lighting a fire, dredge
in the fine selfraising flour and always stir in the same direction,
then cream the milk and sugar and whisk well the white of eggs though
she didn't like the eating part when there were any people that made her
shy and often she wondered why you couldn't eat something poetical like
violets or roses and they would have a beautifully appointed drawingroom
with pictures and engravings and the photograph of grandpapa Giltrap's
lovely dog Garryowen that almost talked it was so human and chintz
covers for the chairs and that silver toastrack in Clery's summer
jumble sales like they have in rich houses. He would be tall with
broad shoulders (she had always admired tall men for a husband) with
glistening white teeth under his carefully trimmed sweeping moustache
and they would go on the continent for their honeymoon (three wonderful
weeks!) and then, when they settled down in a nice snug and cosy little
homely house, every morning they would both have brekky, simple but
perfectly served, for their own two selves and before he went out to
business he would give his dear little wifey a good hearty hug and gaze
for a moment deep down into her eyes.

Edy Boardman asked Tommy Caffrey was he done and he said yes so then she
buttoned up his little knickerbockers for him and told him to run off
and play with Jacky and to be good now and not to fight. But Tommy said
he wanted the ball and Edy told him no that baby was playing with the
ball and if he took it there'd be wigs on the green but Tommy said it
was his ball and he wanted his ball and he pranced on the ground, if
you please. The temper of him! O, he was a man already was little Tommy
Caffrey since he was out of pinnies. Edy told him no, no and to be off
now with him and she told Cissy Caffrey not to give in to him.

--You're not my sister, naughty Tommy said. It's my ball.

But Cissy Caffrey told baby Boardman to look up, look up high at her
finger and she snatched the ball quickly and threw it along the sand and
Tommy after it in full career, having won the day.

--Anything for a quiet life, laughed Ciss.

And she tickled tiny tot's two cheeks to make him forget and played
here's the lord mayor, here's his two horses, here's his gingerbread
carriage and here he walks in, chinchopper, chinchopper, chinchopper
chin. But Edy got as cross as two sticks about him getting his own way
like that from everyone always petting him.

--I'd like to give him something, she said, so I would, where I won't
say.

--On the beeoteetom, laughed Cissy merrily.

Gerty MacDowell bent down her head and crimsoned at the idea of Cissy
saying an unladylike thing like that out loud she'd be ashamed of her
life to say, flushing a deep rosy red, and Edy Boardman said she was
sure the gentleman opposite heard what she said. But not a pin cared
Ciss.

--Let him! she said with a pert toss of her head and a piquant tilt of
her nose. Give it to him too on the same place as quick as I'd look at
him.

Madcap Ciss with her golliwog curls. You had to laugh at her sometimes.
For instance when she asked you would you have some more Chinese tea and
jaspberry ram and when she drew the jugs too and the men's faces on her
nails with red ink make you split your sides or when she wanted to go
where you know she said she wanted to run and pay a visit to the Miss
White. That was just like Cissycums. O, and will you ever forget her the
evening she dressed up in her father's suit and hat and the burned cork
moustache and walked down Tritonville road, smoking a cigarette. There
was none to come up to her for fun. But she was sincerity itself, one of
the bravest and truest hearts heaven ever made, not one of your twofaced
things, too sweet to be wholesome.

And then there came out upon the air the sound of voices and the pealing
anthem of the organ. It was the men's temperance retreat conducted
by the missioner, the reverend John Hughes S. J., rosary, sermon and
benediction of the Most Blessed Sacrament. They were there gathered
together without distinction of social class (and a most edifying
spectacle it was to see) in that simple fane beside the waves, after the
storms of this weary world, kneeling before the feet of the immaculate,
reciting the litany of Our Lady of Loreto, beseeching her to intercede
for them, the old familiar words, holy Mary, holy virgin of virgins. How
sad to poor Gerty's ears! Had her father only avoided the clutches of
the demon drink, by taking the pledge or those powders the drink habit
cured in Pearson's Weekly, she might now be rolling in her carriage,
second to none. Over and over had she told herself that as she mused by
the dying embers in a brown study without the lamp because she hated two
lights or oftentimes gazing out of the window dreamily by the hour at
the rain falling on the rusty bucket, thinking. But that vile decoction
which has ruined so many hearths and homes had cist its shadow over her
childhood days. Nay, she had even witnessed in the home circle deeds of
violence caused by intemperance and had seen her own father, a prey to
the fumes of intoxication, forget himself completely for if there was
one thing of all things that Gerty knew it was that the man who lifts
his hand to a woman save in the way of kindness, deserves to be branded
as the lowest of the low.

And still the voices sang in supplication to the Virgin most powerful,
Virgin most merciful. And Gerty, rapt in thought, scarce saw or heard
her companions or the twins at their boyish gambols or the gentleman
off Sandymount green that Cissy Caffrey called the man that was so like
himself passing along the strand taking a short walk. You never saw him
any way screwed but still and for all that she would not like him for a
father because he was too old or something or on account of his face
(it was a palpable case of Doctor Fell) or his carbuncly nose with the
pimples on it and his sandy moustache a bit white under his nose. Poor
father! With all his faults she loved him still when he sang _Tell me,
Mary, how to woo thee_ or _My love and cottage near Rochelle_ and they
had stewed cockles and lettuce with Lazenby's salad dressing for
supper and when he sang _The moon hath raised_ with Mr Dignam that
died suddenly and was buried, God have mercy on him, from a stroke. Her
mother's birthday that was and Charley was home on his holidays and Tom
and Mr Dignam and Mrs and Patsy and Freddy Dignam and they were to have
had a group taken. No-one would have thought the end was so near. Now he
was laid to rest. And her mother said to him to let that be a warning to
him for the rest of his days and he couldn't even go to the funeral on
account of the gout and she had to go into town to bring him the
letters and samples from his office about Catesby's cork lino, artistic,
standard designs, fit for a palace, gives tiptop wear and always bright
and cheery in the home.

A sterling good daughter was Gerty just like a second mother in the
house, a ministering angel too with a little heart worth its weight in
gold. And when her mother had those raging splitting headaches who was
it rubbed the menthol cone on her forehead but Gerty though she didn't
like her mother's taking pinches of snuff and that was the only single
thing they ever had words about, taking snuff. Everyone thought the
world of her for her gentle ways. It was Gerty who turned off the gas at
the main every night and it was Gerty who tacked up on the wall of that
place where she never forgot every fortnight the chlorate of lime Mr
Tunney the grocer's christmas almanac, the picture of halcyon days
where a young gentleman in the costume they used to wear then with a
threecornered hat was offering a bunch of flowers to his ladylove with
oldtime chivalry through her lattice window. You could see there was a
story behind it. The colours were done something lovely. She was in
a soft clinging white in a studied attitude and the gentleman was in
chocolate and he looked a thorough aristocrat. She often looked at them
dreamily when she went there for a certain purpose and felt her own
arms that were white and soft just like hers with the sleeves back
and thought about those times because she had found out in Walker's
pronouncing dictionary that belonged to grandpapa Giltrap about the
halcyon days what they meant.

The twins were now playing in the most approved brotherly fashion
till at last Master Jacky who was really as bold as brass there was
no getting behind that deliberately kicked the ball as hard as ever he
could down towards the seaweedy rocks. Needless to say poor Tommy was
not slow to voice his dismay but luckily the gentleman in black who was
sitting there by himself came gallantly to the rescue and intercepted
the ball. Our two champions claimed their plaything with lusty cries and
to avoid trouble Cissy Caffrey called to the gentleman to throw it to
her please. The gentleman aimed the ball once or twice and then threw
it up the strand towards Cissy Caffrey but it rolled down the slope and
stopped right under Gerty's skirt near the little pool by the rock. The
twins clamoured again for it and Cissy told her to kick it away and
let them fight for it so Gerty drew back her foot but she wished their
stupid ball hadn't come rolling down to her and she gave a kick but she
missed and Edy and Cissy laughed.

--If you fail try again, Edy Boardman said.

Gerty smiled assent and bit her lip. A delicate pink crept into her
pretty cheek but she was determined to let them see so she just lifted
her skirt a little but just enough and took good aim and gave the ball a
jolly good kick and it went ever so far and the two twins after it down
towards the shingle. Pure jealousy of course it was nothing else to draw
attention on account of the gentleman opposite looking. She felt the
warm flush, a danger signal always with Gerty MacDowell, surging and
flaming into her cheeks. Till then they had only exchanged glances of
the most casual but now under the brim of her new hat she ventured a
look at him and the face that met her gaze there in the twilight, wan
and strangely drawn, seemed to her the saddest she had ever seen.

Through the open window of the church the fragrant incense was wafted
and with it the fragrant names of her who was conceived without stain of
original sin, spiritual vessel, pray for us, honourable vessel, pray
for us, vessel of singular devotion, pray for us, mystical rose. And
careworn hearts were there and toilers for their daily bread and many
who had erred and wandered, their eyes wet with contrition but for all
that bright with hope for the reverend father Father Hughes had told
them what the great saint Bernard said in his famous prayer of Mary, the
most pious Virgin's intercessory power that it was not recorded in any
age that those who implored her powerful protection were ever abandoned
by her.

The twins were now playing again right merrily for the troubles of
childhood are but as fleeting summer showers. Cissy Caffrey played with
baby Boardman till he crowed with glee, clapping baby hands in air. Peep
she cried behind the hood of the pushcar and Edy asked where was Cissy
gone and then Cissy popped up her head and cried ah! and, my word,
didn't the little chap enjoy that! And then she told him to say papa.

--Say papa, baby. Say pa pa pa pa pa pa pa.

And baby did his level best to say it for he was very intelligent for
eleven months everyone said and big for his age and the picture of
health, a perfect little bunch of love, and he would certainly turn out
to be something great, they said.

--Haja ja ja haja.

Cissy wiped his little mouth with the dribbling bib and wanted him to
sit up properly and say pa pa pa but when she undid the strap she cried
out, holy saint Denis, that he was possing wet and to double the half
blanket the other way under him. Of course his infant majesty was most
obstreperous at such toilet formalities and he let everyone know it:

--Habaa baaaahabaaa baaaa.

And two great big lovely big tears coursing down his cheeks. It was all
no use soothering him with no, nono, baby, no and telling him about the
geegee and where was the puffpuff but Ciss, always readywitted, gave
him in his mouth the teat of the suckingbottle and the young heathen was
quickly appeased.

Gerty wished to goodness they would take their squalling baby home out
of that and not get on her nerves, no hour to be out, and the little
brats of twins. She gazed out towards the distant sea. It was like the
paintings that man used to do on the pavement with all the coloured
chalks and such a pity too leaving them there to be all blotted out, the
evening and the clouds coming out and the Bailey light on Howth and to
hear the music like that and the perfume of those incense they burned
in the church like a kind of waft. And while she gazed her heart went
pitapat. Yes, it was her he was looking at, and there was meaning in his
look. His eyes burned into her as though they would search her through
and through, read her very soul. Wonderful eyes they were, superbly
expressive, but could you trust them? People were so queer. She could
see at once by his dark eyes and his pale intellectual face that he
was a foreigner, the image of the photo she had of Martin Harvey, the
matinee idol, only for the moustache which she preferred because she
wasn't stagestruck like Winny Rippingham that wanted they two to always
dress the same on account of a play but she could not see whether he had
an aquiline nose or a slightly _retroussÃ©_ from where he was sitting.
He was in deep mourning, she could see that, and the story of a haunting
sorrow was written on his face. She would have given worlds to know what
it was. He was looking up so intently, so still, and he saw her kick the
ball and perhaps he could see the bright steel buckles of her shoes if
she swung them like that thoughtfully with the toes down. She was glad
that something told her to put on the transparent stockings thinking
Reggy Wylie might be out but that was far away. Here was that of which
she had so often dreamed. It was he who mattered and there was joy on
her face because she wanted him because she felt instinctively that he
was like no-one else. The very heart of the girlwoman went out to him,
her dreamhusband, because she knew on the instant it was him. If he had
suffered, more sinned against than sinning, or even, even, if he had
been himself a sinner, a wicked man, she cared not. Even if he was a
protestant or methodist she could convert him easily if he truly loved
her. There were wounds that wanted healing with heartbalm. She was a
womanly woman not like other flighty girls unfeminine he had known,
those cyclists showing off what they hadn't got and she just yearned to
know all, to forgive all if she could make him fall in love with her,
make him forget the memory of the past. Then mayhap he would embrace her
gently, like a real man, crushing her soft body to him, and love her,
his ownest girlie, for herself alone.

Refuge of sinners. Comfortress of the afflicted. _Ora pro nobis_. Well
has it been said that whosoever prays to her with faith and constancy
can never be lost or cast away: and fitly is she too a haven of refuge
for the afflicted because of the seven dolours which transpierced
her own heart. Gerty could picture the whole scene in the church, the
stained glass windows lighted up, the candles, the flowers and the blue
banners of the blessed Virgin's sodality and Father Conroy was helping
Canon O'Hanlon at the altar, carrying things in and out with his eyes
cast down. He looked almost a saint and his confessionbox was so quiet
and clean and dark and his hands were just like white wax and if ever
she became a Dominican nun in their white habit perhaps he might come to
the convent for the novena of Saint Dominic. He told her that time when
she told him about that in confession, crimsoning up to the roots of her
hair for fear he could see, not to be troubled because that was only the
voice of nature and we were all subject to nature's laws, he said, in
this life and that that was no sin because that came from the nature of
woman instituted by God, he said, and that Our Blessed Lady herself said
to the archangel Gabriel be it done unto me according to Thy Word. He
was so kind and holy and often and often she thought and thought could
she work a ruched teacosy with embroidered floral design for him as a
present or a clock but they had a clock she noticed on the mantelpiece
white and gold with a canarybird that came out of a little house to tell
the time the day she went there about the flowers for the forty hours'
adoration because it was hard to know what sort of a present to give or
perhaps an album of illuminated views of Dublin or some place.

The exasperating little brats of twins began to quarrel again and Jacky
threw the ball out towards the sea and they both ran after it. Little
monkeys common as ditchwater. Someone ought to take them and give them
a good hiding for themselves to keep them in their places, the both of
them. And Cissy and Edy shouted after them to come back because they
were afraid the tide might come in on them and be drowned.

--Jacky! Tommy!

Not they! What a great notion they had! So Cissy said it was the very
last time she'd ever bring them out. She jumped up and called them and
she ran down the slope past him, tossing her hair behind her which had
a good enough colour if there had been more of it but with all the
thingamerry she was always rubbing into it she couldn't get it to grow
long because it wasn't natural so she could just go and throw her hat at
it. She ran with long gandery strides it was a wonder she didn't rip up
her skirt at the side that was too tight on her because there was a lot
of the tomboy about Cissy Caffrey and she was a forward piece whenever
she thought she had a good opportunity to show and just because she was
a good runner she ran like that so that he could see all the end of her
petticoat running and her skinny shanks up as far as possible. It
would have served her just right if she had tripped up over something
accidentally on purpose with her high crooked French heels on her to
make her look tall and got a fine tumble. _Tableau!_ That would have
been a very charming expose for a gentleman like that to witness.

Queen of angels, queen of patriarchs, queen of prophets, of all saints,
they prayed, queen of the most holy rosary and then Father Conroy handed
the thurible to Canon O'Hanlon and he put in the incense and censed the
Blessed Sacrament and Cissy Caffrey caught the two twins and she was
itching to give them a ringing good clip on the ear but she didn't
because she thought he might be watching but she never made a bigger
mistake in all her life because Gerty could see without looking that
he never took his eyes off of her and then Canon O'Hanlon handed the
thurible back to Father Conroy and knelt down looking up at the Blessed
Sacrament and the choir began to sing the _Tantum ergo_ and she just
swung her foot in and out in time as the music rose and fell to
the _Tantumer gosa cramen tum_. Three and eleven she paid for those
stockings in Sparrow's of George's street on the Tuesday, no the Monday
before Easter and there wasn't a brack on them and that was what he
was looking at, transparent, and not at her insignificant ones that had
neither shape nor form (the cheek of her!) because he had eyes in his
head to see the difference for himself.

Cissy came up along the strand with the two twins and their ball with
her hat anyhow on her to one side after her run and she did look a
streel tugging the two kids along with the flimsy blouse she bought only
a fortnight before like a rag on her back and a bit of her petticoat
hanging like a caricature. Gerty just took off her hat for a moment to
settle her hair and a prettier, a daintier head of nutbrown tresses was
never seen on a girl's shoulders--a radiant little vision, in sooth,
almost maddening in its sweetness. You would have to travel many a long
mile before you found a head of hair the like of that. She could almost
see the swift answering flash of admiration in his eyes that set her
tingling in every nerve. She put on her hat so that she could see from
underneath the brim and swung her buckled shoe faster for her breath
caught as she caught the expression in his eyes. He was eying her as a
snake eyes its prey. Her woman's instinct told her that she had raised
the devil in him and at the thought a burning scarlet swept from throat
to brow till the lovely colour of her face became a glorious rose.

Edy Boardman was noticing it too because she was squinting at Gerty,
half smiling, with her specs like an old maid, pretending to nurse the
baby. Irritable little gnat she was and always would be and that was why
no-one could get on with her poking her nose into what was no concern of
hers. And she said to Gerty:

--A penny for your thoughts.

--What? replied Gerty with a smile reinforced by the whitest of teeth. I
was only wondering was it late.

Because she wished to goodness they'd take the snottynosed twins and
their babby home to the mischief out of that so that was why she just
gave a gentle hint about its being late. And when Cissy came up Edy
asked her the time and Miss Cissy, as glib as you like, said it was half
past kissing time, time to kiss again. But Edy wanted to know because
they were told to be in early.

--Wait, said Cissy, I'll run ask my uncle Peter over there what's the
time by his conundrum.

So over she went and when he saw her coming she could see him take his
hand out of his pocket, getting nervous, and beginning to play with his
watchchain, looking up at the church. Passionate nature though he was
Gerty could see that he had enormous control over himself. One moment he
had been there, fascinated by a loveliness that made him gaze, and the
next moment it was the quiet gravefaced gentleman, selfcontrol expressed
in every line of his distinguishedlooking figure.

Cissy said to excuse her would he mind please telling her what was the
right time and Gerty could see him taking out his watch, listening to it
and looking up and clearing his throat and he said he was very sorry his
watch was stopped but he thought it must be after eight because the
sun was set. His voice had a cultured ring in it and though he spoke in
measured accents there was a suspicion of a quiver in the mellow tones.
Cissy said thanks and came back with her tongue out and said uncle said
his waterworks were out of order.

Then they sang the second verse of the _Tantum ergo_ and Canon O'Hanlon
got up again and censed the Blessed Sacrament and knelt down and he told
Father Conroy that one of the candles was just going to set fire to the
flowers and Father Conroy got up and settled it all right and she could
see the gentleman winding his watch and listening to the works and she
swung her leg more in and out in time. It was getting darker but he
could see and he was looking all the time that he was winding the watch
or whatever he was doing to it and then he put it back and put his hands
back into his pockets. She felt a kind of a sensation rushing all over
her and she knew by the feel of her scalp and that irritation against
her stays that that thing must be coming on because the last time too
was when she clipped her hair on account of the moon. His dark eyes
fixed themselves on her again drinking in her every contour, literally
worshipping at her shrine. If ever there was undisguised admiration in a
man's passionate gaze it was there plain to be seen on that man's face.
It is for you, Gertrude MacDowell, and you know it.

Edy began to get ready to go and it was high time for her and Gerty
noticed that that little hint she gave had had the desired effect
because it was a long way along the strand to where there was the place
to push up the pushcar and Cissy took off the twins' caps and tidied
their hair to make herself attractive of course and Canon O'Hanlon stood
up with his cope poking up at his neck and Father Conroy handed him the
card to read off and he read out _Panem de coelo praestitisti eis_ and
Edy and Cissy were talking about the time all the time and asking her
but Gerty could pay them back in their own coin and she just answered
with scathing politeness when Edy asked her was she heartbroken about
her best boy throwing her over. Gerty winced sharply. A brief cold blaze
shone from her eyes that spoke volumes of scorn immeasurable. It hurt--O
yes, it cut deep because Edy had her own quiet way of saying things
like that she knew would wound like the confounded little cat she was.
Gerty's lips parted swiftly to frame the word but she fought back
the sob that rose to her throat, so slim, so flawless, so beautifully
moulded it seemed one an artist might have dreamed of. She had loved him
better than he knew. Lighthearted deceiver and fickle like all his sex
he would never understand what he had meant to her and for an instant
there was in the blue eyes a quick stinging of tears. Their eyes were
probing her mercilessly but with a brave effort she sparkled back in
sympathy as she glanced at her new conquest for them to see.

--O, responded Gerty, quick as lightning, laughing, and the proud head
flashed up. I can throw my cap at who I like because it's leap year.

Her words rang out crystalclear, more musical than the cooing of the
ringdove, but they cut the silence icily. There was that in her young
voice that told that she was not a one to be lightly trifled with. As
for Mr Reggy with his swank and his bit of money she could just chuck
him aside as if he was so much filth and never again would she cast as
much as a second thought on him and tear his silly postcard into a dozen
pieces. And if ever after he dared to presume she could give him one
look of measured scorn that would make him shrivel up on the spot. Miss
puny little Edy's countenance fell to no slight extent and Gerty could
see by her looking as black as thunder that she was simply in a towering
rage though she hid it, the little kinnatt, because that shaft had
struck home for her petty jealousy and they both knew that she was
something aloof, apart, in another sphere, that she was not of them and
never would be and there was somebody else too that knew it and saw it
so they could put that in their pipe and smoke it.

Edy straightened up baby Boardman to get ready to go and Cissy tucked in
the ball and the spades and buckets and it was high time too because the
sandman was on his way for Master Boardman junior. And Cissy told him
too that billy winks was coming and that baby was to go deedaw and baby
looked just too ducky, laughing up out of his gleeful eyes, and Cissy
poked him like that out of fun in his wee fat tummy and baby, without as
much as by your leave, sent up his compliments to all and sundry on to
his brandnew dribbling bib.

--O my! Puddeny pie! protested Ciss. He has his bib destroyed.

The slight _contretemps_ claimed her attention but in two twos she set
that little matter to rights.

Gerty stifled a smothered exclamation and gave a nervous cough and Edy
asked what and she was just going to tell her to catch it while it was
flying but she was ever ladylike in her deportment so she simply passed
it off with consummate tact by saying that that was the benediction
because just then the bell rang out from the steeple over the quiet
seashore because Canon O'Hanlon was up on the altar with the veil that
Father Conroy put round his shoulders giving the benediction with the
Blessed Sacrament in his hands.

How moving the scene there in the gathering twilight, the last glimpse
of Erin, the touching chime of those evening bells and at the same
time a bat flew forth from the ivied belfry through the dusk, hither,
thither, with a tiny lost cry. And she could see far away the lights of
the lighthouses so picturesque she would have loved to do with a box of
paints because it was easier than to make a man and soon the lamplighter
would be going his rounds past the presbyterian church grounds and along
by shady Tritonville avenue where the couples walked and lighting the
lamp near her window where Reggy Wylie used to turn his freewheel like
she read in that book _The Lamplighter_ by Miss Cummins, author of
_Mabel Vaughan_ and other tales. For Gerty had her dreams that no-one
knew of. She loved to read poetry and when she got a keepsake from
Bertha Supple of that lovely confession album with the coralpink cover
to write her thoughts in she laid it in the drawer of her toilettable
which, though it did not err on the side of luxury, was scrupulously
neat and clean. It was there she kept her girlish treasure trove, the
tortoiseshell combs, her child of Mary badge, the whiterose scent, the
eyebrowleine, her alabaster pouncetbox and the ribbons to change
when her things came home from the wash and there were some beautiful
thoughts written in it in violet ink that she bought in Hely's of Dame
Street for she felt that she too could write poetry if she could only
express herself like that poem that appealed to her so deeply that
she had copied out of the newspaper she found one evening round the
potherbs. _Art thou real, my ideal?_ it was called by Louis J Walsh,
Magherafelt, and after there was something about _twilight, wilt thou
ever?_ and ofttimes the beauty of poetry, so sad in its transient
loveliness, had misted her eyes with silent tears for she felt that
the years were slipping by for her, one by one, and but for that one
shortcoming she knew she need fear no competition and that was an
accident coming down Dalkey hill and she always tried to conceal it.
But it must end, she felt. If she saw that magic lure in his eyes there
would be no holding back for her. Love laughs at locksmiths. She
would make the great sacrifice. Her every effort would be to share his
thoughts. Dearer than the whole world would she be to him and gild his
days with happiness. There was the allimportant question and she was
dying to know was he a married man or a widower who had lost his wife
or some tragedy like the nobleman with the foreign name from the land
of song had to have her put into a madhouse, cruel only to be kind.
But even if--what then? Would it make a very great difference? From
everything in the least indelicate her finebred nature instinctively
recoiled. She loathed that sort of person, the fallen women off the
accommodation walk beside the Dodder that went with the soldiers and
coarse men with no respect for a girl's honour, degrading the sex and
being taken up to the police station. No, no: not that. They would be
just good friends like a big brother and sister without all that other
in spite of the conventions of Society with a big ess. Perhaps it was
an old flame he was in mourning for from the days beyond recall. She
thought she understood. She would try to understand him because men were
so different. The old love was waiting, waiting with little white
hands stretched out, with blue appealing eyes. Heart of mine! She would
follow, her dream of love, the dictates of her heart that told her he
was her all in all, the only man in all the world for her for love was
the master guide. Nothing else mattered. Come what might she would be
wild, untrammelled, free.

Canon O'Hanlon put the Blessed Sacrament back into the tabernacle and
genuflected and the choir sang _Laudate Dominum omnes gentes_ and then
he locked the tabernacle door because the benediction was over and
Father Conroy handed him his hat to put on and crosscat Edy asked wasn't
she coming but Jacky Caffrey called out:

--O, look, Cissy!

And they all looked was it sheet lightning but Tommy saw it too over the
trees beside the church, blue and then green and purple.

--It's fireworks, Cissy Caffrey said.

And they all ran down the strand to see over the houses and the church,
helterskelter, Edy with the pushcar with baby Boardman in it and Cissy
holding Tommy and Jacky by the hand so they wouldn't fall running.

--Come on, Gerty, Cissy called. It's the bazaar fireworks.

But Gerty was adamant. She had no intention of being at their beck and
call. If they could run like rossies she could sit so she said she could
see from where she was. The eyes that were fastened upon her set her
pulses tingling. She looked at him a moment, meeting his glance, and
a light broke in upon her. Whitehot passion was in that face, passion
silent as the grave, and it had made her his. At last they were left
alone without the others to pry and pass remarks and she knew he could
be trusted to the death, steadfast, a sterling man, a man of inflexible
honour to his fingertips. His hands and face were working and a tremour
went over her. She leaned back far to look up where the fireworks were
and she caught her knee in her hands so as not to fall back looking up
and there was no-one to see only him and her when she revealed all her
graceful beautifully shaped legs like that, supply soft and delicately
rounded, and she seemed to hear the panting of his heart, his hoarse
breathing, because she knew too about the passion of men like that,
hotblooded, because Bertha Supple told her once in dead secret and made
her swear she'd never about the gentleman lodger that was staying with
them out of the Congested Districts Board that had pictures cut out of
papers of those skirtdancers and highkickers and she said he used to do
something not very nice that you could imagine sometimes in the bed. But
this was altogether different from a thing like that because there was
all the difference because she could almost feel him draw her face to
his and the first quick hot touch of his handsome lips. Besides there
was absolution so long as you didn't do the other thing before being
married and there ought to be women priests that would understand
without your telling out and Cissy Caffrey too sometimes had that dreamy
kind of dreamy look in her eyes so that she too, my dear, and Winny
Rippingham so mad about actors' photographs and besides it was on
account of that other thing coming on the way it did.

And Jacky Caffrey shouted to look, there was another and she leaned back
and the garters were blue to match on account of the transparent and
they all saw it and they all shouted to look, look, there it was and
she leaned back ever so far to see the fireworks and something queer was
flying through the air, a soft thing, to and fro, dark. And she saw a
long Roman candle going up over the trees, up, up, and, in the tense
hush, they were all breathless with excitement as it went higher and
higher and she had to lean back more and more to look up after it, high,
high, almost out of sight, and her face was suffused with a divine, an
entrancing blush from straining back and he could see her other things
too, nainsook knickers, the fabric that caresses the skin, better than
those other pettiwidth, the green, four and eleven, on account of being
white and she let him and she saw that he saw and then it went so high
it went out of sight a moment and she was trembling in every limb from
being bent so far back that he had a full view high up above her knee
where no-one ever not even on the swing or wading and she wasn't ashamed
and he wasn't either to look in that immodest way like that because he
couldn't resist the sight of the wondrous revealment half offered like
those skirtdancers behaving so immodest before gentlemen looking and he
kept on looking, looking. She would fain have cried to him chokingly,
held out her snowy slender arms to him to come, to feel his lips laid on
her white brow, the cry of a young girl's love, a little strangled cry,
wrung from her, that cry that has rung through the ages. And then a
rocket sprang and bang shot blind blank and O! then the Roman candle
burst and it was like a sigh of O! and everyone cried O! O! in raptures
and it gushed out of it a stream of rain gold hair threads and they
shed and ah! they were all greeny dewy stars falling with golden, O so
lovely, O, soft, sweet, soft!

Then all melted away dewily in the grey air: all was silent. Ah! She
glanced at him as she bent forward quickly, a pathetic little glance of
piteous protest, of shy reproach under which he coloured like a girl He
was leaning back against the rock behind. Leopold Bloom (for it is he)
stands silent, with bowed head before those young guileless eyes. What a
brute he had been! At it again? A fair unsullied soul had called to him
and, wretch that he was, how had he answered? An utter cad he had been!
He of all men! But there was an infinite store of mercy in those eyes,
for him too a word of pardon even though he had erred and sinned and
wandered. Should a girl tell? No, a thousand times no. That was their
secret, only theirs, alone in the hiding twilight and there was none to
know or tell save the little bat that flew so softly through the evening
to and fro and little bats don't tell.

Cissy Caffrey whistled, imitating the boys in the football field to show
what a great person she was: and then she cried:

--Gerty! Gerty! We're going. Come on. We can see from farther up.

Gerty had an idea, one of love's little ruses. She slipped a hand into
her kerchief pocket and took out the wadding and waved in reply of
course without letting him and then slipped it back. Wonder if he's too
far to. She rose. Was it goodbye? No. She had to go but they would meet
again, there, and she would dream of that till then, tomorrow, of her
dream of yester eve. She drew herself up to her full height. Their souls
met in a last lingering glance and the eyes that reached her heart, full
of a strange shining, hung enraptured on her sweet flowerlike face. She
half smiled at him wanly, a sweet forgiving smile, a smile that verged
on tears, and then they parted.

Slowly, without looking back she went down the uneven strand to Cissy,
to Edy to Jacky and Tommy Caffrey, to little baby Boardman. It was
darker now and there were stones and bits of wood on the strand and
slippy seaweed. She walked with a certain quiet dignity characteristic
of her but with care and very slowly because--because Gerty MacDowell
was...

Tight boots? No. She's lame! O!

Mr Bloom watched her as she limped away. Poor girl! That's why she's
left on the shelf and the others did a sprint. Thought something was
wrong by the cut of her jib. Jilted beauty. A defect is ten times worse
in a woman. But makes them polite. Glad I didn't know it when she was on
show. Hot little devil all the same. I wouldn't mind. Curiosity like a
nun or a negress or a girl with glasses. That squinty one is delicate.
Near her monthlies, I expect, makes them feel ticklish. I have such
a bad headache today. Where did I put the letter? Yes, all right. All
kinds of crazy longings. Licking pennies. Girl in Tranquilla convent
that nun told me liked to smell rock oil. Virgins go mad in the end I
suppose. Sister? How many women in Dublin have it today? Martha, she.
Something in the air. That's the moon. But then why don't all women
menstruate at the same time with the same moon, I mean? Depends on the
time they were born I suppose. Or all start scratch then get out of
step. Sometimes Molly and Milly together. Anyhow I got the best of that.
Damned glad I didn't do it in the bath this morning over her silly I
will punish you letter. Made up for that tramdriver this morning. That
gouger M'Coy stopping me to say nothing. And his wife engagement in the
country valise, voice like a pickaxe. Thankful for small mercies.
Cheap too. Yours for the asking. Because they want it themselves. Their
natural craving. Shoals of them every evening poured out of offices.
Reserve better. Don't want it they throw it at you. Catch em alive, O.
Pity they can't see themselves. A dream of wellfilled hose. Where was
that? Ah, yes. Mutoscope pictures in Capel street: for men only. Peeping
Tom. Willy's hat and what the girls did with it. Do they snapshot those
girls or is it all a fake? _Lingerie_ does it. Felt for the curves
inside her _deshabillÃ©._ Excites them also when they're. I'm all clean
come and dirty me. And they like dressing one another for the sacrifice.
Milly delighted with Molly's new blouse. At first. Put them all on to
take them all off. Molly. Why I bought her the violet garters. Us too:
the tie he wore, his lovely socks and turnedup trousers. He wore a pair
of gaiters the night that first we met. His lovely shirt was shining
beneath his what? of jet. Say a woman loses a charm with every pin she
takes out. Pinned together. O, Mairy lost the pin of her. Dressed up to
the nines for somebody. Fashion part of their charm. Just changes when
you're on the track of the secret. Except the east: Mary, Martha: now as
then. No reasonable offer refused. She wasn't in a hurry either. Always
off to a fellow when they are. They never forget an appointment. Out on
spec probably. They believe in chance because like themselves. And the
others inclined to give her an odd dig. Girl friends at school, arms
round each other's necks or with ten fingers locked, kissing and
whispering secrets about nothing in the convent garden. Nuns with
whitewashed faces, cool coifs and their rosaries going up and down,
vindictive too for what they can't get. Barbed wire. Be sure now and
write to me. And I'll write to you. Now won't you? Molly and Josie
Powell. Till Mr Right comes along, then meet once in a blue moon.
_Tableau!_ O, look who it is for the love of God! How are you at all?
What have you been doing with yourself? Kiss and delighted to, kiss,
to see you. Picking holes in each other's appearance. You're looking
splendid. Sister souls. Showing their teeth at one another. How many
have you left? Wouldn't lend each other a pinch of salt.

Ah!

Devils they are when that's coming on them. Dark devilish appearance.
Molly often told me feel things a ton weight. Scratch the sole of my
foot. O that way! O, that's exquisite! Feel it myself too. Good to rest
once in a way. Wonder if it's bad to go with them then. Safe in one way.
Turns milk, makes fiddlestrings snap. Something about withering plants I
read in a garden. Besides they say if the flower withers she wears she's
a flirt. All are. Daresay she felt 1. When you feel like that you often
meet what you feel. Liked me or what? Dress they look at. Always know a
fellow courting: collars and cuffs. Well cocks and lions do the same
and stags. Same time might prefer a tie undone or something. Trousers?
Suppose I when I was? No. Gently does it. Dislike rough and tumble. Kiss
in the dark and never tell. Saw something in me. Wonder what. Sooner
have me as I am than some poet chap with bearsgrease plastery hair,
lovelock over his dexter optic. To aid gentleman in literary. Ought to
attend to my appearance my age. Didn't let her see me in profile. Still,
you never know. Pretty girls and ugly men marrying. Beauty and the
beast. Besides I can't be so if Molly. Took off her hat to show her
hair. Wide brim. Bought to hide her face, meeting someone might know
her, bend down or carry a bunch of flowers to smell. Hair strong in rut.
Ten bob I got for Molly's combings when we were on the rocks in Holles
street. Why not? Suppose he gave her money. Why not? All a prejudice.
She's worth ten, fifteen, more, a pound. What? I think so. All that for
nothing. Bold hand: Mrs Marion. Did I forget to write address on
that letter like the postcard I sent to Flynn? And the day I went to
Drimmie's without a necktie. Wrangle with Molly it was put me off. No,
I remember. Richie Goulding: he's another. Weighs on his mind. Funny
my watch stopped at half past four. Dust. Shark liver oil they use to
clean. Could do it myself. Save. Was that just when he, she?

O, he did. Into her. She did. Done.

Ah!

Mr Bloom with careful hand recomposed his wet shirt. O Lord, that little
limping devil. Begins to feel cold and clammy. Aftereffect not pleasant.
Still you have to get rid of it someway. They don't care. Complimented
perhaps. Go home to nicey bread and milky and say night prayers with the
kiddies. Well, aren't they? See her as she is spoil all. Must have
the stage setting, the rouge, costume, position, music. The name too.
_Amours_ of actresses. Nell Gwynn, Mrs Bracegirdle, Maud Branscombe.
Curtain up. Moonlight silver effulgence. Maiden discovered with pensive
bosom. Little sweetheart come and kiss me. Still, I feel. The strength
it gives a man. That's the secret of it. Good job I let off there behind
the wall coming out of Dignam's. Cider that was. Otherwise I couldn't
have. Makes you want to sing after. _Lacaus esant taratara_. Suppose I
spoke to her. What about? Bad plan however if you don't know how to end
the conversation. Ask them a question they ask you another. Good idea if
you're stuck. Gain time. But then you're in a cart. Wonderful of course
if you say: good evening, and you see she's on for it: good evening. O
but the dark evening in the Appian way I nearly spoke to Mrs Clinch O
thinking she was. Whew! Girl in Meath street that night. All the dirty
things I made her say. All wrong of course. My arks she called it. It's
so hard to find one who. Aho! If you don't answer when they solicit must
be horrible for them till they harden. And kissed my hand when I gave
her the extra two shillings. Parrots. Press the button and the bird will
squeak. Wish she hadn't called me sir. O, her mouth in the dark! And you
a married man with a single girl! That's what they enjoy. Taking a man
from another woman. Or even hear of it. Different with me. Glad to get
away from other chap's wife. Eating off his cold plate. Chap in the
Burton today spitting back gumchewed gristle. French letter still in
my pocketbook. Cause of half the trouble. But might happen sometime,
I don't think. Come in, all is prepared. I dreamt. What? Worst is
beginning. How they change the venue when it's not what they like. Ask
you do you like mushrooms because she once knew a gentleman who. Or ask
you what someone was going to say when he changed his mind and stopped.
Yet if I went the whole hog, say: I want to, something like that.
Because I did. She too. Offend her. Then make it up. Pretend to want
something awfully, then cry off for her sake. Flatters them. She must
have been thinking of someone else all the time. What harm? Must since
she came to the use of reason, he, he and he. First kiss does the trick.
The propitious moment. Something inside them goes pop. Mushy like, tell
by their eye, on the sly. First thoughts are best. Remember that till
their dying day. Molly, lieutenant Mulvey that kissed her under the
Moorish wall beside the gardens. Fifteen she told me. But her breasts
were developed. Fell asleep then. After Glencree dinner that was when we
drove home. Featherbed mountain. Gnashing her teeth in sleep. Lord mayor
had his eye on her too. Val Dillon. Apoplectic.

There she is with them down there for the fireworks. My fireworks. Up
like a rocket, down like a stick. And the children, twins they must
be, waiting for something to happen. Want to be grownups. Dressing in
mother's clothes. Time enough, understand all the ways of the world. And
the dark one with the mop head and the nigger mouth. I knew she could
whistle. Mouth made for that. Like Molly. Why that highclass whore in
Jammet's wore her veil only to her nose. Would you mind, please, telling
me the right time? I'll tell you the right time up a dark lane.
Say prunes and prisms forty times every morning, cure for fat lips.
Caressing the little boy too. Onlookers see most of the game. Of course
they understand birds, animals, babies. In their line.

Didn't look back when she was going down the strand. Wouldn't give that
satisfaction. Those girls, those girls, those lovely seaside girls. Fine
eyes she had, clear. It's the white of the eye brings that out not so
much the pupil. Did she know what I? Course. Like a cat sitting beyond
a dog's jump. Women never meet one like that Wilkins in the high school
drawing a picture of Venus with all his belongings on show. Call that
innocence? Poor idiot! His wife has her work cut out for her. Never see
them sit on a bench marked _Wet Paint_. Eyes all over them. Look under
the bed for what's not there. Longing to get the fright of their lives.
Sharp as needles they are. When I said to Molly the man at the corner of
Cuffe street was goodlooking, thought she might like, twigged at once he
had a false arm. Had, too. Where do they get that? Typist going up Roger
Greene's stairs two at a time to show her understandings. Handed down
from father to, mother to daughter, I mean. Bred in the bone. Milly for
example drying her handkerchief on the mirror to save the ironing. Best
place for an ad to catch a woman's eye on a mirror. And when I sent
her for Molly's Paisley shawl to Prescott's by the way that ad I must,
carrying home the change in her stocking! Clever little minx. I never
told her. Neat way she carries parcels too. Attract men, small thing
like that. Holding up her hand, shaking it, to let the blood flow back
when it was red. Who did you learn that from? Nobody. Something the
nurse taught me. O, don't they know! Three years old she was in front of
Molly's dressingtable, just before we left Lombard street west. Me have
a nice pace. Mullingar. Who knows? Ways of the world. Young student.
Straight on her pins anyway not like the other. Still she was game.
Lord, I am wet. Devil you are. Swell of her calf. Transparent stockings,
stretched to breaking point. Not like that frump today. A. E. Rumpled
stockings. Or the one in Grafton street. White. Wow! Beef to the heel.

A monkey puzzle rocket burst, spluttering in darting crackles. Zrads and
zrads, zrads, zrads. And Cissy and Tommy and Jacky ran out to see and
Edy after with the pushcar and then Gerty beyond the curve of the rocks.
Will she? Watch! Watch! See! Looked round. She smelt an onion. Darling,
I saw, your. I saw all.

Lord!

Did me good all the same. Off colour after Kiernan's, Dignam's. For
this relief much thanks. In _Hamlet,_ that is. Lord! It was all things
combined. Excitement. When she leaned back, felt an ache at the butt
of my tongue. Your head it simply swirls. He's right. Might have made a
worse fool of myself however. Instead of talking about nothing. Then
I will tell you all. Still it was a kind of language between us. It
couldn't be? No, Gerty they called her. Might be false name however like
my name and the address Dolphin's barn a blind.

_Her maiden name was Jemina Brown And she lived with her mother in
Irishtown._

Place made me think of that I suppose. All tarred with the same brush
Wiping pens in their stockings. But the ball rolled down to her as if
it understood. Every bullet has its billet. Course I never could throw
anything straight at school. Crooked as a ram's horn. Sad however
because it lasts only a few years till they settle down to potwalloping
and papa's pants will soon fit Willy and fuller's earth for the baby
when they hold him out to do ah ah. No soft job. Saves them. Keeps
them out of harm's way. Nature. Washing child, washing corpse. Dignam.
Children's hands always round them. Cocoanut skulls, monkeys, not even
closed at first, sour milk in their swaddles and tainted curds. Oughtn't
to have given that child an empty teat to suck. Fill it up with wind.
Mrs Beaufoy, Purefoy. Must call to the hospital. Wonder is nurse Callan
there still. She used to look over some nights when Molly was in the
Coffee Palace. That young doctor O'Hare I noticed her brushing his coat.
And Mrs Breen and Mrs Dignam once like that too, marriageable. Worst
of all at night Mrs Duggan told me in the City Arms. Husband rolling in
drunk, stink of pub off him like a polecat. Have that in your nose in
the dark, whiff of stale boose. Then ask in the morning: was I drunk
last night? Bad policy however to fault the husband. Chickens come home
to roost. They stick by one another like glue. Maybe the women's fault
also. That's where Molly can knock spots off them. It's the blood of the
south. Moorish. Also the form, the figure. Hands felt for the opulent.
Just compare for instance those others. Wife locked up at home, skeleton
in the cupboard. Allow me to introduce my. Then they trot you out some
kind of a nondescript, wouldn't know what to call her. Always see a
fellow's weak point in his wife. Still there's destiny in it, falling
in love. Have their own secrets between them. Chaps that would go to the
dogs if some woman didn't take them in hand. Then little chits of girls,
height of a shilling in coppers, with little hubbies. As God made them
he matched them. Sometimes children turn out well enough. Twice nought
makes one. Or old rich chap of seventy and blushing bride. Marry in May
and repent in December. This wet is very unpleasant. Stuck. Well the
foreskin is not back. Better detach.

Ow!

Other hand a sixfooter with a wifey up to his watchpocket. Long and
the short of it. Big he and little she. Very strange about my watch.
Wristwatches are always going wrong. Wonder is there any magnetic
influence between the person because that was about the time he. Yes, I
suppose, at once. Cat's away, the mice will play. I remember looking
in Pill lane. Also that now is magnetism. Back of everything magnetism.
Earth for instance pulling this and being pulled. That causes movement.
And time, well that's the time the movement takes. Then if one thing
stopped the whole ghesabo would stop bit by bit. Because it's all
arranged. Magnetic needle tells you what's going on in the sun, the
stars. Little piece of steel iron. When you hold out the fork. Come.
Come. Tip. Woman and man that is. Fork and steel. Molly, he. Dress up
and look and suggest and let you see and see more and defy you if you're
a man to see that and, like a sneeze coming, legs, look, look and if you
have any guts in you. Tip. Have to let fly.

Wonder how is she feeling in that region. Shame all put on before third
person. More put out about a hole in her stocking. Molly, her underjaw
stuck out, head back, about the farmer in the ridingboots and spurs at
the horse show. And when the painters were in Lombard street west.
Fine voice that fellow had. How Giuglini began. Smell that I did. Like
flowers. It was too. Violets. Came from the turpentine probably in the
paint. Make their own use of everything. Same time doing it scraped her
slipper on the floor so they wouldn't hear. But lots of them can't kick
the beam, I think. Keep that thing up for hours. Kind of a general all
round over me and half down my back.

Wait. Hm. Hm. Yes. That's her perfume. Why she waved her hand. I leave
you this to think of me when I'm far away on the pillow. What is it?
Heliotrope? No. Hyacinth? Hm. Roses, I think. She'd like scent of that
kind. Sweet and cheap: soon sour. Why Molly likes opoponax. Suits her,
with a little jessamine mixed. Her high notes and her low notes. At the
dance night she met him, dance of the hours. Heat brought it out. She
was wearing her black and it had the perfume of the time before. Good
conductor, is it? Or bad? Light too. Suppose there's some connection.
For instance if you go into a cellar where it's dark. Mysterious thing
too. Why did I smell it only now? Took its time in coming like herself,
slow but sure. Suppose it's ever so many millions of tiny grains
blown across. Yes, it is. Because those spice islands, Cinghalese this
morning, smell them leagues off. Tell you what it is. It's like a fine
fine veil or web they have all over the skin, fine like what do you
call it gossamer, and they're always spinning it out of them, fine as
anything, like rainbow colours without knowing it. Clings to everything
she takes off. Vamp of her stockings. Warm shoe. Stays. Drawers: little
kick, taking them off. Byby till next time. Also the cat likes to sniff
in her shift on the bed. Know her smell in a thousand. Bathwater too.
Reminds me of strawberries and cream. Wonder where it is really. There
or the armpits or under the neck. Because you get it out of all holes
and corners. Hyacinth perfume made of oil of ether or something.
Muskrat. Bag under their tails. One grain pour off odour for years. Dogs
at each other behind. Good evening. Evening. How do you sniff? Hm. Hm.
Very well, thank you. Animals go by that. Yes now, look at it that way.
We're the same. Some women, instance, warn you off when they have their
period. Come near. Then get a hogo you could hang your hat on. Like
what? Potted herrings gone stale or. Boof! Please keep off the grass.

Perhaps they get a man smell off us. What though? Cigary gloves long
John had on his desk the other day. Breath? What you eat and drink gives
that. No. Mansmell, I mean. Must be connected with that because priests
that are supposed to be are different. Women buzz round it like flies
round treacle. Railed off the altar get on to it at any cost. The tree
of forbidden priest. O, father, will you? Let me be the first to. That
diffuses itself all through the body, permeates. Source of life. And
it's extremely curious the smell. Celery sauce. Let me.

Mr Bloom inserted his nose. Hm. Into the. Hm. Opening of his waistcoat.
Almonds or. No. Lemons it is. Ah no, that's the soap.

O by the by that lotion. I knew there was something on my mind. Never
went back and the soap not paid. Dislike carrying bottles like that hag
this morning. Hynes might have paid me that three shillings. I could
mention Meagher's just to remind him. Still if he works that paragraph.
Two and nine. Bad opinion of me he'll have. Call tomorrow. How much do
I owe you? Three and nine? Two and nine, sir. Ah. Might stop him giving
credit another time. Lose your customers that way. Pubs do. Fellows run
up a bill on the slate and then slinking around the back streets into
somewhere else.

Here's this nobleman passed before. Blown in from the bay. Just went as
far as turn back. Always at home at dinnertime. Looks mangled out: had a
good tuck in. Enjoying nature now. Grace after meals. After supper walk
a mile. Sure he has a small bank balance somewhere, government sit. Walk
after him now make him awkward like those newsboys me today. Still you
learn something. See ourselves as others see us. So long as women don't
mock what matter? That's the way to find out. Ask yourself who is he
now. _The Mystery Man on the Beach_, prize titbit story by Mr Leopold
Bloom. Payment at the rate of one guinea per column. And that fellow
today at the graveside in the brown macintosh. Corns on his kismet
however. Healthy perhaps absorb all the. Whistle brings rain they say.
Must be some somewhere. Salt in the Ormond damp. The body feels the
atmosphere. Old Betty's joints are on the rack. Mother Shipton's
prophecy that is about ships around they fly in the twinkling. No. Signs
of rain it is. The royal reader. And distant hills seem coming nigh.

Howth. Bailey light. Two, four, six, eight, nine. See. Has to change or
they might think it a house. Wreckers. Grace Darling. People afraid of
the dark. Also glowworms, cyclists: lightingup time. Jewels diamonds
flash better. Women. Light is a kind of reassuring. Not going to hurt
you. Better now of course than long ago. Country roads. Run you through
the small guts for nothing. Still two types there are you bob against.
Scowl or smile. Pardon! Not at all. Best time to spray plants too in
the shade after the sun. Some light still. Red rays are longest. Roygbiv
Vance taught us: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. A
star I see. Venus? Can't tell yet. Two. When three it's night. Were
those nightclouds there all the time? Looks like a phantom ship. No.
Wait. Trees are they? An optical illusion. Mirage. Land of the setting
sun this. Homerule sun setting in the southeast. My native land,
goodnight.

Dew falling. Bad for you, dear, to sit on that stone. Brings on white
fluxions. Never have little baby then less he was big strong fight his
way up through. Might get piles myself. Sticks too like a summer cold,
sore on the mouth. Cut with grass or paper worst. Friction of the
position. Like to be that rock she sat on. O sweet little, you don't
know how nice you looked. I begin to like them at that age. Green
apples. Grab at all that offer. Suppose it's the only time we cross
legs, seated. Also the library today: those girl graduates. Happy chairs
under them. But it's the evening influence. They feel all that. Open
like flowers, know their hours, sunflowers, Jerusalem artichokes, in
ballrooms, chandeliers, avenues under the lamps. Nightstock in Mat
Dillon's garden where I kissed her shoulder. Wish I had a full length
oilpainting of her then. June that was too I wooed. The year returns.
History repeats itself. Ye crags and peaks I'm with you once again.
Life, love, voyage round your own little world. And now? Sad about her
lame of course but must be on your guard not to feel too much pity. They
take advantage.

All quiet on Howth now. The distant hills seem. Where we. The
rhododendrons. I am a fool perhaps. He gets the plums, and I the
plumstones. Where I come in. All that old hill has seen. Names change:
that's all. Lovers: yum yum.

Tired I feel now. Will I get up? O wait. Drained all the manhood out of
me, little wretch. She kissed me. Never again. My youth. Only once it
comes. Or hers. Take the train there tomorrow. No. Returning not the
same. Like kids your second visit to a house. The new I want. Nothing
new under the sun. Care of P. O. Dolphin's Barn. Are you not happy in
your? Naughty darling. At Dolphin's barn charades in Luke Doyle's house.
Mat Dillon and his bevy of daughters: Tiny, Atty, Floey, Maimy, Louy,
Hetty. Molly too. Eightyseven that was. Year before we. And the old
major, partial to his drop of spirits. Curious she an only child, I an
only child. So it returns. Think you're escaping and run into yourself.
Longest way round is the shortest way home. And just when he and she.
Circus horse walking in a ring. Rip van Winkle we played. Rip: tear in
Henny Doyle's overcoat. Van: breadvan delivering. Winkle: cockles and
periwinkles. Then I did Rip van Winkle coming back. She leaned on the
sideboard watching. Moorish eyes. Twenty years asleep in Sleepy Hollow.
All changed. Forgotten. The young are old. His gun rusty from the dew.

Ba. What is that flying about? Swallow? Bat probably. Thinks I'm a tree,
so blind. Have birds no smell? Metempsychosis. They believed you could
be changed into a tree from grief. Weeping willow. Ba. There he goes.
Funny little beggar. Wonder where he lives. Belfry up there. Very
likely. Hanging by his heels in the odour of sanctity. Bell scared him
out, I suppose. Mass seems to be over. Could hear them all at it. Pray
for us. And pray for us. And pray for us. Good idea the repetition. Same
thing with ads. Buy from us. And buy from us. Yes, there's the light in
the priest's house. Their frugal meal. Remember about the mistake in the
valuation when I was in Thom's. Twentyeight it is. Two houses they have.
Gabriel Conroy's brother is curate. Ba. Again. Wonder why they come out
at night like mice. They're a mixed breed. Birds are like hopping mice.
What frightens them, light or noise? Better sit still. All instinct
like the bird in drouth got water out of the end of a jar by throwing
in pebbles. Like a little man in a cloak he is with tiny hands. Weeny
bones. Almost see them shimmering, kind of a bluey white. Colours depend
on the light you see. Stare the sun for example like the eagle then look
at a shoe see a blotch blob yellowish. Wants to stamp his trademark on
everything. Instance, that cat this morning on the staircase. Colour of
brown turf. Say you never see them with three colours. Not true. That
half tabbywhite tortoiseshell in the _City Arms_ with the letter em on
her forehead. Body fifty different colours. Howth a while ago amethyst.
Glass flashing. That's how that wise man what's his name with the
burning glass. Then the heather goes on fire. It can't be tourists'
matches. What? Perhaps the sticks dry rub together in the wind and
light. Or broken bottles in the furze act as a burning glass in the sun.
Archimedes. I have it! My memory's not so bad.

Ba. Who knows what they're always flying for. Insects? That bee last
week got into the room playing with his shadow on the ceiling. Might
be the one bit me, come back to see. Birds too. Never find out. Or what
they say. Like our small talk. And says she and says he. Nerve they have
to fly over the ocean and back. Lots must be killed in storms, telegraph
wires. Dreadful life sailors have too. Big brutes of oceangoing steamers
floundering along in the dark, lowing out like seacows. _Faugh a
Ballagh!_ Out of that, bloody curse to you! Others in vessels, bit of
a handkerchief sail, pitched about like snuff at a wake when the stormy
winds do blow. Married too. Sometimes away for years at the ends of the
earth somewhere. No ends really because it's round. Wife in every port
they say. She has a good job if she minds it till Johnny comes marching
home again. If ever he does. Smelling the tail end of ports. How can
they like the sea? Yet they do. The anchor's weighed. Off he sails with
a scapular or a medal on him for luck. Well. And the tephilim no what's
this they call it poor papa's father had on his door to touch. That
brought us out of the land of Egypt and into the house of bondage.
Something in all those superstitions because when you go out never know
what dangers. Hanging on to a plank or astride of a beam for grim life,
lifebelt round him, gulping salt water, and that's the last of his nibs
till the sharks catch hold of him. Do fish ever get seasick?

Then you have a beautiful calm without a cloud, smooth sea, placid,
crew and cargo in smithereens, Davy Jones' locker, moon looking down so
peaceful. Not my fault, old cockalorum.

A last lonely candle wandered up the sky from Mirus bazaar in search of
funds for Mercer's hospital and broke, drooping, and shed a cluster
of violet but one white stars. They floated, fell: they faded. The
shepherd's hour: the hour of folding: hour of tryst. From house to
house, giving his everwelcome double knock, went the nine o'clock
postman, the glowworm's lamp at his belt gleaming here and there through
the laurel hedges. And among the five young trees a hoisted lintstock
lit the lamp at Leahy's terrace. By screens of lighted windows, by equal
gardens a shrill voice went crying, wailing: _Evening Telegraph, stop
press edition! Result of the Gold Cup race!_ and from the door of
Dignam's house a boy ran out and called. Twittering the bat flew here,
flew there. Far out over the sands the coming surf crept, grey. Howth
settled for slumber, tired of long days, of yumyum rhododendrons (he was
old) and felt gladly the night breeze lift, ruffle his fell of ferns.
He lay but opened a red eye unsleeping, deep and slowly breathing,
slumberous but awake. And far on Kish bank the anchored lightship
twinkled, winked at Mr Bloom.

Life those chaps out there must have, stuck in the same spot. Irish
Lights board. Penance for their sins. Coastguards too. Rocket and
breeches buoy and lifeboat. Day we went out for the pleasure cruise in
the Erin's King, throwing them the sack of old papers. Bears in the zoo.
Filthy trip. Drunkards out to shake up their livers. Puking overboard
to feed the herrings. Nausea. And the women, fear of God in their faces.
Milly, no sign of funk. Her blue scarf loose, laughing. Don't know what
death is at that age. And then their stomachs clean. But being lost they
fear. When we hid behind the tree at Crumlin. I didn't want to. Mamma!
Mamma! Babes in the wood. Frightening them with masks too. Throwing them
up in the air to catch them. I'll murder you. Is it only half fun? Or
children playing battle. Whole earnest. How can people aim guns at each
other. Sometimes they go off. Poor kids! Only troubles wildfire and
nettlerash. Calomel purge I got her for that. After getting better
asleep with Molly. Very same teeth she has. What do they love? Another
themselves? But the morning she chased her with the umbrella. Perhaps so
as not to hurt. I felt her pulse. Ticking. Little hand it was: now big.
Dearest Papli. All that the hand says when you touch. Loved to count
my waistcoat buttons. Her first stays I remember. Made me laugh to see.
Little paps to begin with. Left one is more sensitive, I think. Mine
too. Nearer the heart? Padding themselves out if fat is in fashion. Her
growing pains at night, calling, wakening me. Frightened she was when
her nature came on her first. Poor child! Strange moment for the mother
too. Brings back her girlhood. Gibraltar. Looking from Buena Vista.
O'Hara's tower. The seabirds screaming. Old Barbary ape that gobbled all
his family. Sundown, gunfire for the men to cross the lines. Looking
out over the sea she told me. Evening like this, but clear, no clouds.
I always thought I'd marry a lord or a rich gentleman coming with a
private yacht. _Buenas noches, seÃ±orita. El hombre ama la muchacha
hermosa_. Why me? Because you were so foreign from the others.

Better not stick here all night like a limpet. This weather makes you
dull. Must be getting on for nine by the light. Go home. Too late for
_Leah, Lily of Killarney._ No. Might be still up. Call to the hospital
to see. Hope she's over. Long day I've had. Martha, the bath, funeral,
house of Keyes, museum with those goddesses, Dedalus' song. Then that
bawler in Barney Kiernan's. Got my own back there. Drunken ranters what
I said about his God made him wince. Mistake to hit back. Or? No.
Ought to go home and laugh at themselves. Always want to be swilling in
company. Afraid to be alone like a child of two. Suppose he hit me. Look
at it other way round. Not so bad then. Perhaps not to hurt he meant.
Three cheers for Israel. Three cheers for the sister-in-law he hawked
about, three fangs in her mouth. Same style of beauty. Particularly nice
old party for a cup of tea. The sister of the wife of the wild man of
Borneo has just come to town. Imagine that in the early morning at close
range. Everyone to his taste as Morris said when he kissed the cow. But
Dignam's put the boots on it. Houses of mourning so depressing because
you never know. Anyhow she wants the money. Must call to those Scottish
Widows as I promised. Strange name. Takes it for granted we're going to
pop off first. That widow on Monday was it outside Cramer's that
looked at me. Buried the poor husband but progressing favourably on
the premium. Her widow's mite. Well? What do you expect her to do? Must
wheedle her way along. Widower I hate to see. Looks so forlorn. Poor man
O'Connor wife and five children poisoned by mussels here. The sewage.
Hopeless. Some good matronly woman in a porkpie hat to mother him. Take
him in tow, platter face and a large apron. Ladies' grey flannelette
bloomers, three shillings a pair, astonishing bargain. Plain and loved,
loved for ever, they say. Ugly: no woman thinks she is. Love, lie and be
handsome for tomorrow we die. See him sometimes walking about trying to
find out who played the trick. U. p: up. Fate that is. He, not me. Also
a shop often noticed. Curse seems to dog it. Dreamt last night? Wait.
Something confused. She had red slippers on. Turkish. Wore the breeches.
Suppose she does? Would I like her in pyjamas? Damned hard to answer.
Nannetti's gone. Mailboat. Near Holyhead by now. Must nail that ad
of Keyes's. Work Hynes and Crawford. Petticoats for Molly. She has
something to put in them. What's that? Might be money.

Mr Bloom stooped and turned over a piece of paper on the strand. He
brought it near his eyes and peered. Letter? No. Can't read. Better go.
Better. I'm tired to move. Page of an old copybook. All those holes and
pebbles. Who could count them? Never know what you find. Bottle with
story of a treasure in it, thrown from a wreck. Parcels post. Children
always want to throw things in the sea. Trust? Bread cast on the waters.
What's this? Bit of stick.

O! Exhausted that female has me. Not so young now. Will she come here
tomorrow? Wait for her somewhere for ever. Must come back. Murderers do.
Will I?

Mr Bloom with his stick gently vexed the thick sand at his foot. Write a
message for her. Might remain. What?

I.

Some flatfoot tramp on it in the morning. Useless. Washed away. Tide
comes here. Saw a pool near her foot. Bend, see my face there, dark
mirror, breathe on it, stirs. All these rocks with lines and scars and
letters. O, those transparent! Besides they don't know. What is the
meaning of that other world. I called you naughty boy because I do not
like.

AM. A.

No room. Let it go.

Mr Bloom effaced the letters with his slow boot. Hopeless thing sand.
Nothing grows in it. All fades. No fear of big vessels coming up here.
Except Guinness's barges. Round the Kish in eighty days. Done half by
design.

He flung his wooden pen away. The stick fell in silted sand, stuck. Now
if you were trying to do that for a week on end you couldn't. Chance.
We'll never meet again. But it was lovely. Goodbye, dear. Thanks. Made
me feel so young.

Short snooze now if I had. Must be near nine. Liverpool boat long gone..
Not even the smoke. And she can do the other. Did too. And Belfast. I
won't go. Race there, race back to Ennis. Let him. Just close my eyes
a moment. Won't sleep, though. Half dream. It never comes the same. Bat
again. No harm in him. Just a few.

O sweety all your little girlwhite up I saw dirty bracegirdle made me do
love sticky we two naughty Grace darling she him half past the bed met
him pike hoses frillies for Raoul de perfume your wife black hair heave
under embon _seÃ±orita_ young eyes Mulvey plump bubs me breadvan Winkle
red slippers she rusty sleep wander years of dreams return tail end
Agendath swoony lovey showed me her next year in drawers return next in
her next her next.

A bat flew. Here. There. Here. Far in the grey a bell chimed. Mr Bloom
with open mouth, his left boot sanded sideways, leaned, breathed. Just
for a few

     _Cuckoo
     Cuckoo
     Cuckoo._

The clock on the mantelpiece in the priest's house cooed where Canon
O'Hanlon and Father Conroy and the reverend John Hughes S. J. were
taking tea and sodabread and butter and fried mutton chops with catsup
and talking about

     _Cuckoo
     Cuckoo
     Cuckoo._

Because it was a little canarybird that came out of its little house
to tell the time that Gerty MacDowell noticed the time she was there
because she was as quick as anything about a thing like that, was Gerty
MacDowell, and she noticed at once that that foreign gentleman that was
sitting on the rocks looking was

     _Cuckoo
     Cuckoo
     Cuckoo._


Deshil Holles Eamus. Deshil Holles Eamus. Deshil Holles Eamus.

Send us bright one, light one, Horhorn, quickening and wombfruit. Send
us bright one, light one, Horhorn, quickening and wombfruit. Send us
bright one, light one, Horhorn, quickening and wombfruit.

Hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa! Hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa! Hoopsa boyaboy hoopsa!

Universally that person's acumen is esteemed very little perceptive
concerning whatsoever matters are being held as most profitably by
mortals with sapience endowed to be studied who is ignorant of that
which the most in doctrine erudite and certainly by reason of that in
them high mind's ornament deserving of veneration constantly maintain
when by general consent they affirm that other circumstances being
equal by no exterior splendour is the prosperity of a nation more
efficaciously asserted than by the measure of how far forward may
have progressed the tribute of its solicitude for that proliferent
continuance which of evils the original if it be absent when fortunately
present constitutes the certain sign of omnipotent nature's incorrupted
benefaction. For who is there who anything of some significance has
apprehended but is conscious that that exterior splendour may be the
surface of a downwardtending lutulent reality or on the contrary anyone
so is there unilluminated as not to perceive that as no nature's boon
can contend against the bounty of increase so it behoves every most just
citizen to become the exhortator and admonisher of his semblables and
to tremble lest what had in the past been by the nation excellently
commenced might be in the future not with similar excellence
accomplished if an inverecund habit shall have gradually traduced
the honourable by ancestors transmitted customs to that thither of
profundity that that one was audacious excessively who would have the
hardihood to rise affirming that no more odious offence can for anyone
be than to oblivious neglect to consign that evangel simultaneously
command and promise which on all mortals with prophecy of abundance
or with diminution's menace that exalted of reiteratedly procreating
function ever irrevocably enjoined?

It is not why therefore we shall wonder if, as the best historians
relate, among the Celts, who nothing that was not in its nature
admirable admired, the art of medicine shall have been highly honoured.
Not to speak of hostels, leperyards, sweating chambers, plaguegraves,
their greatest doctors, the O'Shiels, the O'Hickeys, the O'Lees,
have sedulously set down the divers methods by which the sick and the
relapsed found again health whether the malady had been the trembling
withering or loose boyconnell flux. Certainly in every public work which
in it anything of gravity contains preparation should be with importance
commensurate and therefore a plan was by them adopted (whether by having
preconsidered or as the maturation of experience it is difficult in
being said which the discrepant opinions of subsequent inquirers are not
up to the present congrued to render manifest) whereby maternity was so
far from all accident possibility removed that whatever care the patient
in that all hardest of woman hour chiefly required and not solely
for the copiously opulent but also for her who not being sufficiently
moneyed scarcely and often not even scarcely could subsist valiantly and
for an inconsiderable emolument was provided.

To her nothing already then and thenceforward was anyway able to be
molestful for this chiefly felt all citizens except with proliferent
mothers prosperity at all not to can be and as they had received
eternity gods mortals generation to befit them her beholding, when the
case was so hoving itself, parturient in vehicle thereward carrying
desire immense among all one another was impelling on of her to be
received into that domicile. O thing of prudent nation not merely in
being seen but also even in being related worthy of being praised that
they her by anticipation went seeing mother, that she by them suddenly
to be about to be cherished had been begun she felt!

Before born bliss babe had. Within womb won he worship. Whatever in that
one case done commodiously done was. A couch by midwives attended with
wholesome food reposeful, cleanest swaddles as though forthbringing were
now done and by wise foresight set: but to this no less of what drugs
there is need and surgical implements which are pertaining to her
case not omitting aspect of all very distracting spectacles in various
latitudes by our terrestrial orb offered together with images, divine
and human, the cogitation of which by sejunct females is to tumescence
conducive or eases issue in the high sunbright wellbuilt fair home of
mothers when, ostensibly far gone and reproductitive, it is come by her
thereto to lie in, her term up.

Some man that wayfaring was stood by housedoor at night's oncoming. Of
Israel's folk was that man that on earth wandering far had fared. Stark
ruth of man his errand that him lone led till that house.

Of that house A. Horne is lord. Seventy beds keeps he there teeming
mothers are wont that they lie for to thole and bring forth bairns hale
so God's angel to Mary quoth. Watchers tway there walk, white sisters
in ward sleepless. Smarts they still, sickness soothing: in twelve moons
thrice an hundred. Truest bedthanes they twain are, for Horne holding
wariest ward.

In ward wary the watcher hearing come that man mildhearted eft rising
with swire ywimpled to him her gate wide undid. Lo, levin leaping
lightens in eyeblink Ireland's westward welkin. Full she drad that
God the Wreaker all mankind would fordo with water for his evil sins.
Christ's rood made she on breastbone and him drew that he would rathe
infare under her thatch. That man her will wotting worthful went in
Horne's house.

Loth to irk in Horne's hall hat holding the seeker stood. On her stow he
ere was living with dear wife and lovesome daughter that then over land
and seafloor nine years had long outwandered. Once her in townhithe
meeting he to her bow had not doffed. Her to forgive now he craved with
good ground of her allowed that that of him swiftseen face, hers, so
young then had looked. Light swift her eyes kindled, bloom of blushes
his word winning.

As her eyes then ongot his weeds swart therefor sorrow she feared. Glad
after she was that ere adread was. Her he asked if O'Hare Doctor tidings
sent from far coast and she with grameful sigh him answered that O'Hare
Doctor in heaven was. Sad was the man that word to hear that him so
heavied in bowels ruthful. All she there told him, ruing death for
friend so young, algate sore unwilling God's rightwiseness to withsay.
She said that he had a fair sweet death through God His goodness with
masspriest to be shriven, holy housel and sick men's oil to his limbs.
The man then right earnest asked the nun of which death the dead man was
died and the nun answered him and said that he was died in Mona Island
through bellycrab three year agone come Childermas and she prayed to God
the Allruthful to have his dear soul in his undeathliness. He heard her
sad words, in held hat sad staring. So stood they there both awhile in
wanhope sorrowing one with other.

Therefore, everyman, look to that last end that is thy death and the
dust that gripeth on every man that is born of woman for as he came
naked forth from his mother's womb so naked shall he wend him at the
last for to go as he came.

The man that was come in to the house then spoke to the nursingwoman and
he asked her how it fared with the woman that lay there in childbed.
The nursingwoman answered him and said that that woman was in throes
now full three days and that it would be a hard birth unneth to bear
but that now in a little it would be. She said thereto that she had
seen many births of women but never was none so hard as was that woman's
birth. Then she set it all forth to him for because she knew the man
that time was had lived nigh that house. The man hearkened to her words
for he felt with wonder women's woe in the travail that they have of
motherhood and he wondered to look on her face that was a fair face for
any man to see but yet was she left after long years a handmaid. Nine
twelve bloodflows chiding her childless.

And whiles they spake the door of the castle was opened and there nighed
them a mickle noise as of many that sat there at meat. And there came
against the place as they stood a young learningknight yclept Dixon. And
the traveller Leopold was couth to him sithen it had happed that they
had had ado each with other in the house of misericord where this
learningknight lay by cause the traveller Leopold came there to be
healed for he was sore wounded in his breast by a spear wherewith a
horrible and dreadful dragon was smitten him for which he did do make
a salve of volatile salt and chrism as much as he might suffice. And he
said now that he should go in to that castle for to make merry with
them that were there. And the traveller Leopold said that he should go
otherwhither for he was a man of cautels and a subtile. Also the lady
was of his avis and repreved the learningknight though she trowed well
that the traveller had said thing that was false for his subtility. But
the learningknight would not hear say nay nor do her mandement ne have
him in aught contrarious to his list and he said how it was a marvellous
castle. And the traveller Leopold went into the castle for to rest him
for a space being sore of limb after many marches environing in divers
lands and sometime venery.

And in the castle was set a board that was of the birchwood of Finlandy
and it was upheld by four dwarfmen of that country but they durst not
move more for enchantment. And on this board were frightful swords and
knives that are made in a great cavern by swinking demons out of white
flames that they fix then in the horns of buffalos and stags that there
abound marvellously. And there were vessels that are wrought by magic of
Mahound out of seasand and the air by a warlock with his breath that he
blases in to them like to bubbles. And full fair cheer and rich was on
the board that no wight could devise a fuller ne richer. And there was
a vat of silver that was moved by craft to open in the which lay strange
fishes withouten heads though misbelieving men nie that this be possible
thing without they see it natheless they are so. And these fishes lie
in an oily water brought there from Portugal land because of the fatness
that therein is like to the juices of the olivepress. And also it was
a marvel to see in that castle how by magic they make a compost out of
fecund wheatkidneys out of Chaldee that by aid of certain angry spirits
that they do in to it swells up wondrously like to a vast mountain. And
they teach the serpents there to entwine themselves up on long sticks
out of the ground and of the scales of these serpents they brew out a
brewage like to mead.

And the learning knight let pour for childe Leopold a draught and halp
thereto the while all they that were there drank every each. And childe
Leopold did up his beaver for to pleasure him and took apertly somewhat
in amity for he never drank no manner of mead which he then put by and
anon full privily he voided the more part in his neighbour glass and
his neighbour nist not of this wile. And he sat down in that castle with
them for to rest him there awhile. Thanked be Almighty God.

This meanwhile this good sister stood by the door and begged them at the
reverence of Jesu our alther liege Lord to leave their wassailing for
there was above one quick with child, a gentle dame, whose time hied
fast. Sir Leopold heard on the upfloor cry on high and he wondered what
cry that it was whether of child or woman and I marvel, said he, that it
be not come or now. Meseems it dureth overlong. And he was ware and saw
a franklin that hight Lenehan on that side the table that was older than
any of the tother and for that they both were knights virtuous in the
one emprise and eke by cause that he was elder he spoke to him full
gently. But, said he, or it be long too she will bring forth by God His
bounty and have joy of her childing for she hath waited marvellous long.
And the franklin that had drunken said, Expecting each moment to be her
next. Also he took the cup that stood tofore him for him needed never
none asking nor desiring of him to drink and, Now drink, said he, fully
delectably, and he quaffed as far as he might to their both's health for
he was a passing good man of his lustiness. And sir Leopold that was the
goodliest guest that ever sat in scholars' hall and that was the meekest
man and the kindest that ever laid husbandly hand under hen and that was
the very truest knight of the world one that ever did minion service
to lady gentle pledged him courtly in the cup. Woman's woe with wonder
pondering.

Now let us speak of that fellowship that was there to the intent to be
drunken an they might. There was a sort of scholars along either side
the board, that is to wit, Dixon yclept junior of saint Mary Merciable's
with other his fellows Lynch and Madden, scholars of medicine, and the
franklin that hight Lenehan and one from Alba Longa, one Crotthers, and
young Stephen that had mien of a frere that was at head of the board
and Costello that men clepen Punch Costello all long of a mastery of
him erewhile gested (and of all them, reserved young Stephen, he was the
most drunken that demanded still of more mead) and beside the meek sir
Leopold. But on young Malachi they waited for that he promised to have
come and such as intended to no goodness said how he had broke his avow.
And sir Leopold sat with them for he bore fast friendship to sir Simon
and to this his son young Stephen and for that his languor becalmed him
there after longest wanderings insomuch as they feasted him for that
time in the honourablest manner. Ruth red him, love led on with will to
wander, loth to leave.

For they were right witty scholars. And he heard their aresouns each gen
other as touching birth and righteousness, young Madden maintaining that
put such case it were hard the wife to die (for so it had fallen out a
matter of some year agone with a woman of Eblana in Horne's house that
now was trespassed out of this world and the self night next before her
death all leeches and pothecaries had taken counsel of her case). And
they said farther she should live because in the beginning, they said,
the woman should bring forth in pain and wherefore they that were of
this imagination affirmed how young Madden had said truth for he had
conscience to let her die. And not few and of these was young Lynch
were in doubt that the world was now right evil governed as it was never
other howbeit the mean people believed it otherwise but the law nor his
judges did provide no remedy. A redress God grant. This was scant said
but all cried with one acclaim nay, by our Virgin Mother, the wife
should live and the babe to die. In colour whereof they waxed hot
upon that head what with argument and what for their drinking but the
franklin Lenehan was prompt each when to pour them ale so that at the
least way mirth might not lack. Then young Madden showed all the whole
affair and said how that she was dead and how for holy religion sake by
rede of palmer and bedesman and for a vow he had made to Saint Ultan of
Arbraccan her goodman husband would not let her death whereby they were
all wondrous grieved. To whom young Stephen had these words following:
Murmur, sirs, is eke oft among lay folk. Both babe and parent now
glorify their Maker, the one in limbo gloom, the other in purgefire.
But, gramercy, what of those Godpossibled souls that we nightly
impossibilise, which is the sin against the Holy Ghost, Very God, Lord
and Giver of Life? For, sirs, he said, our lust is brief. We are means
to those small creatures within us and nature has other ends than we.
Then said Dixon junior to Punch Costello wist he what ends. But he had
overmuch drunken and the best word he could have of him was that he
would ever dishonest a woman whoso she were or wife or maid or leman if
it so fortuned him to be delivered of his spleen of lustihead. Whereat
Crotthers of Alba Longa sang young Malachi's praise of that beast the
unicorn how once in the millennium he cometh by his horn, the other all
this while, pricked forward with their jibes wherewith they did malice
him, witnessing all and several by saint Foutinus his engines that
he was able to do any manner of thing that lay in man to do. Thereat
laughed they all right jocundly only young Stephen and sir Leopold which
never durst laugh too open by reason of a strange humour which he would
not bewray and also for that he rued for her that bare whoso she might
be or wheresoever. Then spake young Stephen orgulous of mother Church
that would cast him out of her bosom, of law of canons, of Lilith,
patron of abortions, of bigness wrought by wind of seeds of brightness
or by potency of vampires mouth to mouth or, as Virgilius saith, by the
influence of the occident or by the reek of moonflower or an she lie
with a woman which her man has but lain with, _effectu secuto_, or
peradventure in her bath according to the opinions of Averroes and Moses
Maimonides. He said also how at the end of the second month a human soul
was infused and how in all our holy mother foldeth ever souls for God's
greater glory whereas that earthly mother which was but a dam to bear
beastly should die by canon for so saith he that holdeth the fisherman's
seal, even that blessed Peter on which rock was holy church for all ages
founded. All they bachelors then asked of sir Leopold would he in like
case so jeopard her person as risk life to save life. A wariness of
mind he would answer as fitted all and, laying hand to jaw, he said
dissembling, as his wont was, that as it was informed him, who had ever
loved the art of physic as might a layman, and agreeing also with his
experience of so seldomseen an accident it was good for that mother
Church belike at one blow had birth and death pence and in such sort
deliverly he scaped their questions. That is truth, pardy, said Dixon,
and, or I err, a pregnant word. Which hearing young Stephen was a
marvellous glad man and he averred that he who stealeth from the poor
lendeth to the Lord for he was of a wild manner when he was drunken and
that he was now in that taking it appeared eftsoons.

But sir Leopold was passing grave maugre his word by cause he still had
pity of the terrorcausing shrieking of shrill women in their labour
and as he was minded of his good lady Marion that had borne him an only
manchild which on his eleventh day on live had died and no man of art
could save so dark is destiny. And she was wondrous stricken of heart
for that evil hap and for his burial did him on a fair corselet of
lamb's wool, the flower of the flock, lest he might perish utterly and
lie akeled (for it was then about the midst of the winter) and now Sir
Leopold that had of his body no manchild for an heir looked upon him his
friend's son and was shut up in sorrow for his forepassed happiness and
as sad as he was that him failed a son of such gentle courage (for all
accounted him of real parts) so grieved he also in no less measure
for young Stephen for that he lived riotously with those wastrels and
murdered his goods with whores.

About that present time young Stephen filled all cups that stood empty
so as there remained but little mo if the prudenter had not shadowed
their approach from him that still plied it very busily who, praying for
the intentions of the sovereign pontiff, he gave them for a pledge the
vicar of Christ which also as he said is vicar of Bray. Now drink we,
quod he, of this mazer and quaff ye this mead which is not indeed parcel
of my body but my soul's bodiment. Leave ye fraction of bread to them
that live by bread alone. Be not afeard neither for any want for this
will comfort more than the other will dismay. See ye here. And he showed
them glistering coins of the tribute and goldsmith notes the worth of
two pound nineteen shilling that he had, he said, for a song which he
writ. They all admired to see the foresaid riches in such dearth of
money as was herebefore. His words were then these as followeth: Know
all men, he said, time's ruins build eternity's mansions. What means
this? Desire's wind blasts the thorntree but after it becomes from a
bramblebush to be a rose upon the rood of time. Mark me now. In woman's
womb word is made flesh but in the spirit of the maker all flesh
that passes becomes the word that shall not pass away. This is the
postcreation. _Omnis caro ad te veniet_. No question but her name is
puissant who aventried the dear corse of our Agenbuyer, Healer and Herd,
our mighty mother and mother most venerable and Bernardus saith aptly
that She hath an _omnipotentiam deiparae supplicem_, that is to wit, an
almightiness of petition because she is the second Eve and she won
us, saith Augustine too, whereas that other, our grandam, which we are
linked up with by successive anastomosis of navelcords sold us all,
seed, breed and generation, for a penny pippin. But here is the matter
now. Or she knew him, that second I say, and was but creature of her
creature, _vergine madre, figlia di tuo figlio_, or she knew him not and
then stands she in the one denial or ignorancy with Peter Piscator who
lives in the house that Jack built and with Joseph the joiner patron of
the happy demise of all unhappy marriages, _parceque M. LÃ©o Taxil nous
a dit que qui l'avait mise dans cette fichue position c'Ã©tait le
sacre pigeon, ventre de Dieu! Entweder_ transubstantiality ODER
consubstantiality but in no case subsubstantiality. And all cried out
upon it for a very scurvy word. A pregnancy without joy, he said, a
birth without pangs, a body without blemish, a belly without bigness.
Let the lewd with faith and fervour worship. With will will we
withstand, withsay.

Hereupon Punch Costello dinged with his fist upon the board and would
sing a bawdy catch _Staboo Stabella_ about a wench that was put in pod
of a jolly swashbuckler in Almany which he did straightways now attack:
_The first three months she was not well, Staboo,_ when here nurse
Quigley from the door angerly bid them hist ye should shame you nor
was it not meet as she remembered them being her mind was to have all
orderly against lord Andrew came for because she was jealous that
no gasteful turmoil might shorten the honour of her guard. It was an
ancient and a sad matron of a sedate look and christian walking,
in habit dun beseeming her megrims and wrinkled visage, nor did her
hortative want of it effect for incontinently Punch Costello was of them
all embraided and they reclaimed the churl with civil rudeness some and
shaked him with menace of blandishments others whiles they all chode
with him, a murrain seize the dolt, what a devil he would be at, thou
chuff, thou puny, thou got in peasestraw, thou losel, thou chitterling,
thou spawn of a rebel, thou dykedropt, thou abortion thou, to shut up
his drunken drool out of that like a curse of God ape, the good sir
Leopold that had for his cognisance the flower of quiet, margerain
gentle, advising also the time's occasion as most sacred and most worthy
to be most sacred. In Horne's house rest should reign.

To be short this passage was scarce by when Master Dixon of Mary in
Eccles, goodly grinning, asked young Stephen what was the reason why he
had not cided to take friar's vows and he answered him obedience in the
womb, chastity in the tomb but involuntary poverty all his days. Master
Lenehan at this made return that he had heard of those nefarious deeds
and how, as he heard hereof counted, he had besmirched the lily virtue
of a confiding female which was corruption of minors and they all
intershowed it too, waxing merry and toasting to his fathership. But he
said very entirely it was clean contrary to their suppose for he was
the eternal son and ever virgin. Thereat mirth grew in them the more and
they rehearsed to him his curious rite of wedlock for the disrobing and
deflowering of spouses, as the priests use in Madagascar island, she
to be in guise of white and saffron, her groom in white and grain, with
burning of nard and tapers, on a bridebed while clerks sung kyries and
the anthem _Ut novetur sexus omnis corporis mysterium_ till she was
there unmaided. He gave them then a much admirable hymen minim by those
delicate poets Master John Fletcher and Master Francis Beaumont that is
in their _Maid's Tragedy_ that was writ for a like twining of lovers:
_To bed, to bed_ was the burden of it to be played with accompanable
concent upon the virginals. An exquisite dulcet epithalame of most
mollificative suadency for juveniles amatory whom the odoriferous
flambeaus of the paranymphs have escorted to the quadrupedal proscenium
of connubial communion. Well met they were, said Master Dixon, joyed,
but, harkee, young sir, better were they named Beau Mount and Lecher
for, by my troth, of such a mingling much might come. Young Stephen said
indeed to his best remembrance they had but the one doxy between them
and she of the stews to make shift with in delights amorous for life ran
very high in those days and the custom of the country approved with it.
Greater love than this, he said, no man hath that a man lay down his
wife for his friend. Go thou and do likewise. Thus, or words to that
effect, saith Zarathustra, sometime regius professor of French letters
to the university of Oxtail nor breathed there ever that man to whom
mankind was more beholden. Bring a stranger within thy tower it will
go hard but thou wilt have the secondbest bed. _Orate, fratres, pro
memetipso_. And all the people shall say, Amen. Remember, Erin, thy
generations and thy days of old, how thou settedst little by me and by
my word and broughtedst in a stranger to my gates to commit fornication
in my sight and to wax fat and kick like Jeshurum. Therefore hast thou
sinned against my light and hast made me, thy lord, to be the slave of
servants. Return, return, Clan Milly: forget me not, O Milesian. Why
hast thou done this abomination before me that thou didst spurn me for
a merchant of jalaps and didst deny me to the Roman and to the Indian of
dark speech with whom thy daughters did lie luxuriously? Look forth now,
my people, upon the land of behest, even from Horeb and from Nebo and
from Pisgah and from the Horns of Hatten unto a land flowing with milk
and money. But thou hast suckled me with a bitter milk: my moon and my
sun thou hast quenched for ever. And thou hast left me alone for ever
in the dark ways of my bitterness: and with a kiss of ashes hast thou
kissed my mouth. This tenebrosity of the interior, he proceeded to say,
hath not been illumined by the wit of the septuagint nor so much as
mentioned for the Orient from on high Which brake hell's gates visited a
darkness that was foraneous. Assuefaction minorates atrocities (as Tully
saith of his darling Stoics) and Hamlet his father showeth the prince no
blister of combustion. The adiaphane in the noon of life is an Egypt's
plague which in the nights of prenativity and postmortemity is their
most proper _ubi_ and _quomodo_. And as the ends and ultimates of
all things accord in some mean and measure with their inceptions and
originals, that same multiplicit concordance which leads forth growth
from birth accomplishing by a retrogressive metamorphosis that minishing
and ablation towards the final which is agreeable unto nature so is it
with our subsolar being. The aged sisters draw us into life: we wail,
batten, sport, clip, clasp, sunder, dwindle, die: over us dead they
bend. First, saved from waters of old Nile, among bulrushes, a bed
of fasciated wattles: at last the cavity of a mountain, an occulted
sepulchre amid the conclamation of the hillcat and the ossifrage. And as
no man knows the ubicity of his tumulus nor to what processes we shall
thereby be ushered nor whether to Tophet or to Edenville in the like way
is all hidden when we would backward see from what region of remoteness
the whatness of our whoness hath fetched his whenceness.

Thereto Punch Costello roared out mainly _Etienne chanson_ but he loudly
bid them, lo, wisdom hath built herself a house, this vast majestic
longstablished vault, the crystal palace of the Creator, all in applepie
order, a penny for him who finds the pea.

     _Behold the mansion reared by dedal Jack
     See the malt stored in many a refluent sack,
     In the proud cirque of Jackjohn's bivouac._

A black crack of noise in the street here, alack, bawled back. Loud on
left Thor thundered: in anger awful the hammerhurler. Came now the storm
that hist his heart. And Master Lynch bade him have a care to flout and
witwanton as the god self was angered for his hellprate and paganry. And
he that had erst challenged to be so doughty waxed wan as they might all
mark and shrank together and his pitch that was before so haught uplift
was now of a sudden quite plucked down and his heart shook within the
cage of his breast as he tasted the rumour of that storm. Then did some
mock and some jeer and Punch Costello fell hard again to his yale which
Master Lenehan vowed he would do after and he was indeed but a word and
a blow on any the least colour. But the braggart boaster cried that an
old Nobodaddy was in his cups it was muchwhat indifferent and he would
not lag behind his lead. But this was only to dye his desperation as
cowed he crouched in Horne's hall. He drank indeed at one draught to
pluck up a heart of any grace for it thundered long rumblingly over all
the heavens so that Master Madden, being godly certain whiles, knocked
him on his ribs upon that crack of doom and Master Bloom, at the
braggart's side, spoke to him calming words to slumber his great fear,
advertising how it was no other thing but a hubbub noise that he heard,
the discharge of fluid from the thunderhead, look you, having taken
place, and all of the order of a natural phenomenon.

But was young Boasthard's fear vanquished by Calmer's words? No, for he
had in his bosom a spike named Bitterness which could not by words be
done away. And was he then neither calm like the one nor godly like the
other? He was neither as much as he would have liked to be either. But
could he not have endeavoured to have found again as in his youth the
bottle Holiness that then he lived withal? Indeed no for Grace was not
there to find that bottle. Heard he then in that clap the voice of the
god Bringforth or, what Calmer said, a hubbub of Phenomenon? Heard?
Why, he could not but hear unless he had plugged him up the tube
Understanding (which he had not done). For through that tube he saw that
he was in the land of Phenomenon where he must for a certain one day die
as he was like the rest too a passing show. And would he not accept to
die like the rest and pass away? By no means would he though he must nor
would he make more shows according as men do with wives which Phenomenon
has commanded them to do by the book Law. Then wotted he nought of that
other land which is called Believe-on-Me, that is the land of promise
which behoves to the king Delightful and shall be for ever where there
is no death and no birth neither wiving nor mothering at which all shall
come as many as believe on it? Yes, Pious had told him of that land and
Chaste had pointed him to the way but the reason was that in the way he
fell in with a certain whore of an eyepleasing exterior whose name, she
said, is Bird-in-the-Hand and she beguiled him wrongways from the true
path by her flatteries that she said to him as, Ho, you pretty man, turn
aside hither and I will show you a brave place, and she lay at him so
flatteringly that she had him in her grot which is named Two-in-the-Bush
or, by some learned, Carnal Concupiscence.

This was it what all that company that sat there at commons in Manse
of Mothers the most lusted after and if they met with this whore
Bird-in-the-Hand (which was within all foul plagues, monsters and a
wicked devil) they would strain the last but they would make at her and
know her. For regarding Believe-on-Me they said it was nought else
but notion and they could conceive no thought of it for, first,
Two-in-the-Bush whither she ticed them was the very goodliest grot and
in it were four pillows on which were four tickets with these words
printed on them, Pickaback and Topsyturvy and Shameface and Cheek by
Jowl and, second, for that foul plague Allpox and the monsters they
cared not for them for Preservative had given them a stout shield of
oxengut and, third, that they might take no hurt neither from Offspring
that was that wicked devil by virtue of this same shield which was
named Killchild. So were they all in their blind fancy, Mr Cavil and Mr
Sometimes Godly, Mr Ape Swillale, Mr False Franklin, Mr Dainty Dixon,
Young Boasthard and Mr Cautious Calmer. Wherein, O wretched company,
were ye all deceived for that was the voice of the god that was in a
very grievous rage that he would presently lift his arm up and
spill their souls for their abuses and their spillings done by them
contrariwise to his word which forth to bring brenningly biddeth.

So Thursday sixteenth June Patk. Dignam laid in clay of an apoplexy and
after hard drought, please God, rained, a bargeman coming in by water a
fifty mile or thereabout with turf saying the seed won't sprout, fields
athirst, very sadcoloured and stunk mightily, the quags and tofts too.
Hard to breathe and all the young quicks clean consumed without sprinkle
this long while back as no man remembered to be without. The rosy buds
all gone brown and spread out blobs and on the hills nought but dry flag
and faggots that would catch at first fire. All the world saying, for
aught they knew, the big wind of last February a year that did havoc the
land so pitifully a small thing beside this barrenness. But by and
by, as said, this evening after sundown, the wind sitting in the
west, biggish swollen clouds to be seen as the night increased and the
weatherwise poring up at them and some sheet lightnings at first and
after, past ten of the clock, one great stroke with a long thunder and
in a brace of shakes all scamper pellmell within door for the smoking
shower, the men making shelter for their straws with a clout or
kerchief, womenfolk skipping off with kirtles catched up soon as the
pour came. In Ely place, Baggot street, Duke's lawn, thence through
Merrion green up to Holles street a swash of water flowing that was
before bonedry and not one chair or coach or fiacre seen about but
no more crack after that first. Over against the Rt. Hon. Mr Justice
Fitzgibbon's door (that is to sit with Mr Healy the lawyer upon the
college lands) Mal. Mulligan a gentleman's gentleman that had but come
from Mr Moore's the writer's (that was a papish but is now, folk say,
a good Williamite) chanced against Alec. Bannon in a cut bob (which are
now in with dance cloaks of Kendal green) that was new got to town from
Mullingar with the stage where his coz and Mal M's brother will stay a
month yet till Saint Swithin and asks what in the earth he does there,
he bound home and he to Andrew Horne's being stayed for to crush a cup
of wine, so he said, but would tell him of a skittish heifer, big of
her age and beef to the heel, and all this while poured with rain and
so both together on to Horne's. There Leop. Bloom of Crawford's journal
sitting snug with a covey of wags, likely brangling fellows, Dixon jun.,
scholar of my lady of Mercy's, Vin. Lynch, a Scots fellow, Will. Madden,
T. Lenehan, very sad about a racer he fancied and Stephen D. Leop. Bloom
there for a languor he had but was now better, be having dreamed tonight
a strange fancy of his dame Mrs Moll with red slippers on in a pair of
Turkey trunks which is thought by those in ken to be for a change and
Mistress Purefoy there, that got in through pleading her belly, and now
on the stools, poor body, two days past her term, the midwives sore put
to it and can't deliver, she queasy for a bowl of riceslop that is a
shrewd drier up of the insides and her breath very heavy more than good
and should be a bullyboy from the knocks, they say, but God give her
soon issue. 'Tis her ninth chick to live, I hear, and Lady day bit off
her last chick's nails that was then a twelvemonth and with other three
all breastfed that died written out in a fair hand in the king's bible.
Her hub fifty odd and a methodist but takes the sacrament and is to
be seen any fair sabbath with a pair of his boys off Bullock harbour
dapping on the sound with a heavybraked reel or in a punt he has
trailing for flounder and pollock and catches a fine bag, I hear. In sum
an infinite great fall of rain and all refreshed and will much increase
the harvest yet those in ken say after wind and water fire shall come
for a prognostication of Malachi's almanac (and I hear that Mr Russell
has done a prophetical charm of the same gist out of the Hindustanish
for his farmer's gazette) to have three things in all but this a mere
fetch without bottom of reason for old crones and bairns yet sometimes
they are found in the right guess with their queerities no telling how.

With this came up Lenehan to the feet of the table to say how the letter
was in that night's gazette and he made a show to find it about him
(for he swore with an oath that he had been at pains about it) but on
Stephen's persuasion he gave over the search and was bidden to sit near
by which he did mighty brisk. He was a kind of sport gentleman that
went for a merryandrew or honest pickle and what belonged of women,
horseflesh or hot scandal he had it pat. To tell the truth he was mean
in fortunes and for the most part hankered about the coffeehouses
and low taverns with crimps, ostlers, bookies, Paul's men, runners,
flatcaps, waistcoateers, ladies of the bagnio and other rogues of the
game or with a chanceable catchpole or a tipstaff often at nights
till broad day of whom he picked up between his sackpossets much loose
gossip. He took his ordinary at a boilingcook's and if he had but gotten
into him a mess of broken victuals or a platter of tripes with a bare
tester in his purse he could always bring himself off with his tongue,
some randy quip he had from a punk or whatnot that every mother's son of
them would burst their sides. The other, Costello that is, hearing this
talk asked was it poetry or a tale. Faith, no, he says, Frank (that was
his name), 'tis all about Kerry cows that are to be butchered along of
the plague. But they can go hang, says he with a wink, for me with their
bully beef, a pox on it. There's as good fish in this tin as ever came
out of it and very friendly he offered to take of some salty sprats that
stood by which he had eyed wishly in the meantime and found the place
which was indeed the chief design of his embassy as he was sharpset.
_Mort aux vaches_, says Frank then in the French language that had been
indentured to a brandyshipper that has a winelodge in Bordeaux and he
spoke French like a gentleman too. From a child this Frank had been
a donought that his father, a headborough, who could ill keep him to
school to learn his letters and the use of the globes, matriculated at
the university to study the mechanics but he took the bit between his
teeth like a raw colt and was more familiar with the justiciary and the
parish beadle than with his volumes. One time he would be a playactor,
then a sutler or a welsher, then nought would keep him from the bearpit
and the cocking main, then he was for the ocean sea or to hoof it on
the roads with the romany folk, kidnapping a squire's heir by favour of
moonlight or fecking maids' linen or choking chicken behind a hedge. He
had been off as many times as a cat has lives and back again with naked
pockets as many more to his father the headborough who shed a pint
of tears as often as he saw him. What, says Mr Leopold with his hands
across, that was earnest to know the drift of it, will they slaughter
all? I protest I saw them but this day morning going to the Liverpool
boats, says he. I can scarce believe 'tis so bad, says he. And he had
experience of the like brood beasts and of springers, greasy hoggets and
wether wool, having been some years before actuary for Mr Joseph Cuffe,
a worthy salesmaster that drove his trade for live stock and meadow
auctions hard by Mr Gavin Low's yard in Prussia street. I question with
you there, says he. More like 'tis the hoose or the timber tongue. Mr
Stephen, a little moved but very handsomely told him no such matter and
that he had dispatches from the emperor's chief tailtickler thanking
him for the hospitality, that was sending over Doctor Rinderpest, the
bestquoted cowcatcher in all Muscovy, with a bolus or two of physic to
take the bull by the horns. Come, come, says Mr Vincent, plain dealing.
He'll find himself on the horns of a dilemma if he meddles with a
bull that's Irish, says he. Irish by name and irish by nature, says Mr
Stephen, and he sent the ale purling about, an Irish bull in an English
chinashop. I conceive you, says Mr Dixon. It is that same bull that was
sent to our island by farmer Nicholas, the bravest cattlebreeder of them
all, with an emerald ring in his nose. True for you, says Mr Vincent
cross the table, and a bullseye into the bargain, says he, and a plumper
and a portlier bull, says he, never shit on shamrock. He had horns
galore, a coat of cloth of gold and a sweet smoky breath coming out of
his nostrils so that the women of our island, leaving doughballs and
rollingpins, followed after him hanging his bulliness in daisychains.
What for that, says Mr Dixon, but before he came over farmer Nicholas
that was a eunuch had him properly gelded by a college of doctors who
were no better off than himself. So be off now, says he, and do all my
cousin german the lord Harry tells you and take a farmer's blessing, and
with that he slapped his posteriors very soundly. But the slap and the
blessing stood him friend, says Mr Vincent, for to make up he taught him
a trick worth two of the other so that maid, wife, abbess and widow to
this day affirm that they would rather any time of the month whisper
in his ear in the dark of a cowhouse or get a lick on the nape from his
long holy tongue than lie with the finest strapping young ravisher in
the four fields of all Ireland. Another then put in his word: And they
dressed him, says he, in a point shift and petticoat with a tippet and
girdle and ruffles on his wrists and clipped his forelock and rubbed him
all over with spermacetic oil and built stables for him at every turn of
the road with a gold manger in each full of the best hay in the market
so that he could doss and dung to his heart's content. By this time the
father of the faithful (for so they called him) was grown so heavy that
he could scarce walk to pasture. To remedy which our cozening dames and
damsels brought him his fodder in their apronlaps and as soon as his
belly was full he would rear up on his hind uarters to show their
ladyships a mystery and roar and bellow out of him in bulls' language
and they all after him. Ay, says another, and so pampered was he that he
would suffer nought to grow in all the land but green grass for himself
(for that was the only colour to his mind) and there was a board put up
on a hillock in the middle of the island with a printed notice, saying:
By the Lord Harry, Green is the grass that grows on the ground. And,
says Mr Dixon, if ever he got scent of a cattleraider in Roscommon or
the wilds of Connemara or a husbandman in Sligo that was sowing as much
as a handful of mustard or a bag of rapeseed out he'd run amok over half
the countryside rooting up with his horns whatever was planted and all
by lord Harry's orders. There was bad blood between them at first, says
Mr Vincent, and the lord Harry called farmer Nicholas all the old Nicks
in the world and an old whoremaster that kept seven trulls in his house
and I'll meddle in his matters, says he. I'll make that animal smell
hell, says he, with the help of that good pizzle my father left me. But
one evening, says Mr Dixon, when the lord Harry was cleaning his royal
pelt to go to dinner after winning a boatrace (he had spade oars for
himself but the first rule of the course was that the others were to row
with pitchforks) he discovered in himself a wonderful likeness to a bull
and on picking up a blackthumbed chapbook that he kept in the pantry
he found sure enough that he was a lefthanded descendant of the famous
champion bull of the Romans, _Bos Bovum_, which is good bog Latin for
boss of the show. After that, says Mr Vincent, the lord Harry put his
head into a cow's drinkingtrough in the presence of all his courtiers
and pulling it out again told them all his new name. Then, with the
water running off him, he got into an old smock and skirt that had
belonged to his grandmother and bought a grammar of the bulls' language
to study but he could never learn a word of it except the first personal
pronoun which he copied out big and got off by heart and if ever he went
out for a walk he filled his pockets with chalk to write it upon what
took his fancy, the side of a rock or a teahouse table or a bale of
cotton or a corkfloat. In short, he and the bull of Ireland were soon as
fast friends as an arse and a shirt. They were, says Mr Stephen, and
the end was that the men of the island seeing no help was toward, as
the ungrate women were all of one mind, made a wherry raft, loaded
themselves and their bundles of chattels on shipboard, set all masts
erect, manned the yards, sprang their luff, heaved to, spread three
sheets in the wind, put her head between wind and water, weighed anchor,
ported her helm, ran up the jolly Roger, gave three times three, let the
bullgine run, pushed off in their bumboat and put to sea to recover
the main of America. Which was the occasion, says Mr Vincent, of the
composing by a boatswain of that rollicking chanty:

     _--Pope Peter's but a pissabed.
     A man's a man for a' that._

Our worthy acquaintance Mr Malachi Mulligan now appeared in the doorway
as the students were finishing their apologue accompanied with a friend
whom he had just rencountered, a young gentleman, his name Alec Bannon,
who had late come to town, it being his intention to buy a colour or a
cornetcy in the fencibles and list for the wars. Mr Mulligan was civil
enough to express some relish of it all the more as it jumped with a
project of his own for the cure of the very evil that had been touched
on. Whereat he handed round to the company a set of pasteboard cards
which he had had printed that day at Mr Quinnell's bearing a legend
printed in fair italics: _Mr Malachi Mulligan. Fertiliser and Incubator.
Lambay Island_. His project, as he went on to expound, was to withdraw
from the round of idle pleasures such as form the chief business of sir
Fopling Popinjay and sir Milksop Quidnunc in town and to devote himself
to the noblest task for which our bodily organism has been framed. Well,
let us hear of it, good my friend, said Mr Dixon. I make no doubt it
smacks of wenching. Come, be seated, both. 'Tis as cheap sitting as
standing. Mr Mulligan accepted of the invitation and, expatiating upon
his design, told his hearers that he had been led into this thought by
a consideration of the causes of sterility, both the inhibitory and the
prohibitory, whether the inhibition in its turn were due to conjugal
vexations or to a parsimony of the balance as well as whether the
prohibition proceeded from defects congenital or from proclivities
acquired. It grieved him plaguily, he said, to see the nuptial couch
defrauded of its dearest pledges: and to reflect upon so many agreeable
females with rich jointures, a prey to the vilest bonzes, who hide their
flambeau under a bushel in an uncongenial cloister or lose their womanly
bloom in the embraces of some unaccountable muskin when they might
multiply the inlets of happiness, sacrificing the inestimable jewel of
their sex when a hundred pretty fellows were at hand to caress, this, he
assured them, made his heart weep. To curb this inconvenient (which
he concluded due to a suppression of latent heat), having advised with
certain counsellors of worth and inspected into this matter, he had
resolved to purchase in fee simple for ever the freehold of Lambay
island from its holder, lord Talbot de Malahide, a Tory gentleman of
note much in favour with our ascendancy party. He proposed to set up
there a national fertilising farm to be named _Omphalos_ with an obelisk
hewn and erected after the fashion of Egypt and to offer his dutiful
yeoman services for the fecundation of any female of what grade of life
soever who should there direct to him with the desire of fulfilling the
functions of her natural. Money was no object, he said, nor would he
take a penny for his pains. The poorest kitchenwench no less than the
opulent lady of fashion, if so be their constructions and their tempers
were warm persuaders for their petitions, would find in him their man.
For his nutriment he shewed how he would feed himself exclusively upon a
diet of savoury tubercles and fish and coneys there, the flesh of these
latter prolific rodents being highly recommended for his purpose, both
broiled and stewed with a blade of mace and a pod or two of capsicum
chillies. After this homily which he delivered with much warmth of
asseveration Mr Mulligan in a trice put off from his hat a kerchief with
which he had shielded it. They both, it seems, had been overtaken by the
rain and for all their mending their pace had taken water, as might be
observed by Mr Mulligan's smallclothes of a hodden grey which was now
somewhat piebald. His project meanwhile was very favourably entertained
by his auditors and won hearty eulogies from all though Mr Dixon of
Mary's excepted to it, asking with a finicking air did he purpose also
to carry coals to Newcastle. Mr Mulligan however made court to the
scholarly by an apt quotation from the classics which, as it dwelt
upon his memory, seemed to him a sound and tasteful support of his
contention: _Talis ac tanta depravatio hujus seculi, O quirites,
ut matresfamiliarum nostrae lascivas cujuslibet semiviri libici
titillationes testibus ponderosis atque excelsis erectionibus
centurionum Romanorum magnopere anteponunt_, while for those of ruder
wit he drove home his point by analogies of the animal kingdom more
suitable to their stomach, the buck and doe of the forest glade, the
farmyard drake and duck.

Valuing himself not a little upon his elegance, being indeed a proper
man of person, this talkative now applied himself to his dress with
animadversions of some heat upon the sudden whimsy of the atmospherics
while the company lavished their encomiums upon the project he had
advanced. The young gentleman, his friend, overjoyed as he was at a
passage that had late befallen him, could not forbear to tell it his
nearest neighbour. Mr Mulligan, now perceiving the table, asked for whom
were those loaves and fishes and, seeing the stranger, he made him
a civil bow and said, Pray, sir, was you in need of any professional
assistance we could give? Who, upon his offer, thanked him very
heartily, though preserving his proper distance, and replied that he was
come there about a lady, now an inmate of Horne's house, that was in an
interesting condition, poor body, from woman's woe (and here he fetched
a deep sigh) to know if her happiness had yet taken place. Mr Dixon,
to turn the table, took on to ask of Mr Mulligan himself whether
his incipient ventripotence, upon which he rallied him, betokened an
ovoblastic gestation in the prostatic utricle or male womb or was due,
as with the noted physician, Mr Austin Meldon, to a wolf in the stomach.
For answer Mr Mulligan, in a gale of laughter at his smalls, smote
himself bravely below the diaphragm, exclaiming with an admirable droll
mimic of Mother Grogan (the most excellent creature of her sex though
'tis pity she's a trollop): There's a belly that never bore a bastard.
This was so happy a conceit that it renewed the storm of mirth and threw
the whole room into the most violent agitations of delight. The spry
rattle had run on in the same vein of mimicry but for some larum in the
antechamber.

Here the listener who was none other than the Scotch student, a little
fume of a fellow, blond as tow, congratulated in the liveliest fashion
with the young gentleman and, interrupting the narrative at a salient
point, having desired his visavis with a polite beck to have the
obligingness to pass him a flagon of cordial waters at the same time by
a questioning poise of the head (a whole century of polite breeding had
not achieved so nice a gesture) to which was united an equivalent but
contrary balance of the bottle asked the narrator as plainly as was ever
done in words if he might treat him with a cup of it. _Mais bien sÃ»r_,
noble stranger, said he cheerily, _et mille compliments_. That you may
and very opportunely. There wanted nothing but this cup to crown my
felicity. But, gracious heaven, was I left with but a crust in my wallet
and a cupful of water from the well, my God, I would accept of them and
find it in my heart to kneel down upon the ground and give thanks to
the powers above for the happiness vouchsafed me by the Giver of good
things. With these words he approached the goblet to his lips, took a
complacent draught of the cordial, slicked his hair and, opening his
bosom, out popped a locket that hung from a silk riband, that very
picture which he had cherished ever since her hand had wrote therein.
Gazing upon those features with a world of tenderness, Ah, Monsieur, he
said, had you but beheld her as I did with these eyes at that affecting
instant with her dainty tucker and her new coquette cap (a gift for her
feastday as she told me prettily) in such an artless disorder, of so
melting a tenderness, 'pon my conscience, even you, Monsieur, had been
impelled by generous nature to deliver yourself wholly into the hands of
such an enemy or to quit the field for ever. I declare, I was never so
touched in all my life. God, I thank thee, as the Author of my days!
Thrice happy will he be whom so amiable a creature will bless with her
favours. A sigh of affection gave eloquence to these words and, having
replaced the locket in his bosom, he wiped his eye and sighed again.
Beneficent Disseminator of blessings to all Thy creatures, how great
and universal must be that sweetest of Thy tyrannies which can hold in
thrall the free and the bond, the simple swain and the polished coxcomb,
the lover in the heyday of reckless passion and the husband of maturer
years. But indeed, sir, I wander from the point. How mingled and
imperfect are all our sublunary joys. Maledicity! he exclaimed in
anguish. Would to God that foresight had but remembered me to take my
cloak along! I could weep to think of it. Then, though it had poured
seven showers, we were neither of us a penny the worse. But beshrew me,
he cried, clapping hand to his forehead, tomorrow will be a new day and,
thousand thunders, I know of a _marchand de capotes_, Monsieur Poyntz,
from whom I can have for a livre as snug a cloak of the French fashion
as ever kept a lady from wetting. Tut, tut! cries Le Fecondateur,
tripping in, my friend Monsieur Moore, that most accomplished traveller
(I have just cracked a half bottle AVEC LUI in a circle of the best wits
of the town), is my authority that in Cape Horn, _ventre biche_, they
have a rain that will wet through any, even the stoutest cloak. A
drenching of that violence, he tells me, _sans blague_, has sent more
than one luckless fellow in good earnest posthaste to another world.
Pooh! A _livre!_ cries Monsieur Lynch. The clumsy things are dear at a
sou. One umbrella, were it no bigger than a fairy mushroom, is worth ten
such stopgaps. No woman of any wit would wear one. My dear Kitty told me
today that she would dance in a deluge before ever she would starve in
such an ark of salvation for, as she reminded me (blushing piquantly and
whispering in my ear though there was none to snap her words but giddy
butterflies), dame Nature, by the divine blessing, has implanted it in
our hearts and it has become a household word that _il y a deux choses_
for which the innocence of our original garb, in other circumstances a
breach of the proprieties, is the fittest, nay, the only garment. The
first, said she (and here my pretty philosopher, as I handed her to her
tilbury, to fix my attention, gently tipped with her tongue the outer
chamber of my ear), the first is a bath... But at this point a bell
tinkling in the hall cut short a discourse which promised so bravely for
the enrichment of our store of knowledge.

Amid the general vacant hilarity of the assembly a bell rang and, while
all were conjecturing what might be the cause, Miss Callan entered and,
having spoken a few words in a low tone to young Mr Dixon, retired with
a profound bow to the company. The presence even for a moment among a
party of debauchees of a woman endued with every quality of modesty and
not less severe than beautiful refrained the humourous sallies even of
the most licentious but her departure was the signal for an outbreak of
ribaldry. Strike me silly, said Costello, a low fellow who was fuddled.
A monstrous fine bit of cowflesh! I'll be sworn she has rendezvoused
you. What, you dog? Have you a way with them? Gad's bud, immensely
so, said Mr Lynch. The bedside manner it is that they use in the Mater
hospice. Demme, does not Doctor O'Gargle chuck the nuns there under the
chin. As I look to be saved I had it from my Kitty who has been wardmaid
there any time these seven months. Lawksamercy, doctor, cried the young
blood in the primrose vest, feigning a womanish simper and with immodest
squirmings of his body, how you do tease a body! Drat the man! Bless
me, I'm all of a wibbly wobbly. Why, you're as bad as dear little Father
Cantekissem, that you are! May this pot of four half choke me, cried
Costello, if she aint in the family way. I knows a lady what's got a
white swelling quick as I claps eyes on her. The young surgeon, however,
rose and begged the company to excuse his retreat as the nurse had just
then informed him that he was needed in the ward. Merciful providence
had been pleased to put a period to the sufferings of the lady who was
_enceinte_ which she had borne with a laudable fortitude and she had
given birth to a bouncing boy. I want patience, said he, with those
who, without wit to enliven or learning to instruct, revile an ennobling
profession which, saving the reverence due to the Deity, is the greatest
power for happiness upon the earth. I am positive when I say that if
need were I could produce a cloud of witnesses to the excellence of
her noble exercitations which, so far from being a byword, should be a
glorious incentive in the human breast. I cannot away with them. What?
Malign such an one, the amiable Miss Callan, who is the lustre of
her own sex and the astonishment of ours? And at an instant the most
momentous that can befall a puny child of clay? Perish the thought! I
shudder to think of the future of a race where the seeds of such malice
have been sown and where no right reverence is rendered to mother and
maid in house of Horne. Having delivered himself of this rebuke he
saluted those present on the by and repaired to the door. A murmur
of approval arose from all and some were for ejecting the low soaker
without more ado, a design which would have been effected nor would
he have received more than his bare deserts had he not abridged his
transgression by affirming with a horrid imprecation (for he swore a
round hand) that he was as good a son of the true fold as ever drew
breath. Stap my vitals, said he, them was always the sentiments of
honest Frank Costello which I was bred up most particular to honour thy
father and thy mother that had the best hand to a rolypoly or a hasty
pudding as you ever see what I always looks back on with a loving heart.

To revert to Mr Bloom who, after his first entry, had been conscious of
some impudent mocks which he however had borne with as being the fruits
of that age upon which it is commonly charged that it knows not
pity. The young sparks, it is true, were as full of extravagancies
as overgrown children: the words of their tumultuary discussions
were difficultly understood and not often nice: their testiness and
outrageous _mots_ were such that his intellects resiled from: nor were
they scrupulously sensible of the proprieties though their fund of
strong animal spirits spoke in their behalf. But the word of Mr Costello
was an unwelcome language for him for he nauseated the wretch that
seemed to him a cropeared creature of a misshapen gibbosity, born out
of wedlock and thrust like a crookback toothed and feet first into the
world, which the dint of the surgeon's pliers in his skull lent indeed
a colour to, so as to put him in thought of that missing link of
creation's chain desiderated by the late ingenious Mr Darwin. It was now
for more than the middle span of our allotted years that he had passed
through the thousand vicissitudes of existence and, being of a wary
ascendancy and self a man of rare forecast, he had enjoined his heart
to repress all motions of a rising choler and, by intercepting them
with the readiest precaution, foster within his breast that plenitude
of sufferance which base minds jeer at, rash judgers scorn and all find
tolerable and but tolerable. To those who create themselves wits at the
cost of feminine delicacy (a habit of mind which he never did hold
with) to them he would concede neither to bear the name nor to herit
the tradition of a proper breeding: while for such that, having lost
all forbearance, can lose no more, there remained the sharp antidote of
experience to cause their insolency to beat a precipitate and inglorious
retreat. Not but what he could feel with mettlesome youth which, caring
nought for the mows of dotards or the gruntlings of the severe, is ever
(as the chaste fancy of the Holy Writer expresses it) for eating of the
tree forbid it yet not so far forth as to pretermit humanity upon any
condition soever towards a gentlewoman when she was about her lawful
occasions. To conclude, while from the sister's words he had reckoned
upon a speedy delivery he was, however, it must be owned, not a little
alleviated by the intelligence that the issue so auspicated after an
ordeal of such duress now testified once more to the mercy as well as to
the bounty of the Supreme Being.

Accordingly he broke his mind to his neighbour, saying that, to express
his notion of the thing, his opinion (who ought not perchance to express
one) was that one must have a cold constitution and a frigid genius not
to be rejoiced by this freshest news of the fruition of her confinement
since she had been in such pain through no fault of hers. The dressy
young blade said it was her husband's that put her in that expectation
or at least it ought to be unless she were another Ephesian matron. I
must acquaint you, said Mr Crotthers, clapping on the table so as to
evoke a resonant comment of emphasis, old Glory Allelujurum was round
again today, an elderly man with dundrearies, preferring through his
nose a request to have word of Wilhelmina, my life, as he calls her. I
bade him hold himself in readiness for that the event would burst anon.
'Slife, I'll be round with you. I cannot but extol the virile potency of
the old bucko that could still knock another child out of her. All fell
to praising of it, each after his own fashion, though the same young
blade held with his former view that another than her conjugial had
been the man in the gap, a clerk in orders, a linkboy (virtuous) or
an itinerant vendor of articles needed in every household. Singular,
communed the guest with himself, the wonderfully unequal faculty of
metempsychosis possessed by them, that the puerperal dormitory and the
dissecting theatre should be the seminaries of such frivolity, that the
mere acquisition of academic titles should suffice to transform in a
pinch of time these votaries of levity into exemplary practitioners of
an art which most men anywise eminent have esteemed the noblest. But,
he further added, it is mayhap to relieve the pentup feelings that in
common oppress them for I have more than once observed that birds of a
feather laugh together.

But with what fitness, let it be asked of the noble lord, his patron,
has this alien, whom the concession of a gracious prince has admitted
to civic rights, constituted himself the lord paramount of our
internal polity? Where is now that gratitude which loyalty should have
counselled? During the recent war whenever the enemy had a temporary
advantage with his granados did this traitor to his kind not seize that
moment to discharge his piece against the empire of which he is a tenant
at will while he trembled for the security of his four per cents? Has he
forgotten this as he forgets all benefits received? Or is it that from
being a deluder of others he has become at last his own dupe as he is,
if report belie him not, his own and his only enjoyer? Far be it from
candour to violate the bedchamber of a respectable lady, the daughter of
a gallant major, or to cast the most distant reflections upon her
virtue but if he challenges attention there (as it was indeed highly his
interest not to have done) then be it so. Unhappy woman, she has been
too long and too persistently denied her legitimate prerogative to
listen to his objurgations with any other feeling than the derision of
the desperate. He says this, a censor of morals, a very pelican in his
piety, who did not scruple, oblivious of the ties of nature, to attempt
illicit intercourse with a female domestic drawn from the lowest strata
of society! Nay, had the hussy's scouringbrush not been her tutelary
angel, it had gone with her as hard as with Hagar, the Egyptian! In the
question of the grazing lands his peevish asperity is notorious and in
Mr Cuffe's hearing brought upon him from an indignant rancher a scathing
retort couched in terms as straightforward as they were bucolic. It ill
becomes him to preach that gospel. Has he not nearer home a seedfield
that lies fallow for the want of the ploughshare? A habit reprehensible
at puberty is second nature and an opprobrium in middle life. If he must
dispense his balm of Gilead in nostrums and apothegms of dubious taste
to restore to health a generation of unfledged profligates let his
practice consist better with the doctrines that now engross him. His
marital breast is the repository of secrets which decorum is reluctant
to adduce. The lewd suggestions of some faded beauty may console him for
a consort neglected and debauched but this new exponent of morals and
healer of ills is at his best an exotic tree which, when rooted in
its native orient, throve and flourished and was abundant in balm
but, transplanted to a clime more temperate, its roots have lost their
quondam vigour while the stuff that comes away from it is stagnant, acid
and inoperative.

The news was imparted with a circumspection recalling the ceremonial
usage of the Sublime Porte by the second female infirmarian to the
junior medical officer in residence, who in his turn announced to the
delegation that an heir had been born, When he had betaken himself
to the women's apartment to assist at the prescribed ceremony of the
afterbirth in the presence of the secretary of state for domestic
affairs and the members of the privy council, silent in unanimous
exhaustion and approbation the delegates, chafing under the length and
solemnity of their vigil and hoping that the joyful occurrence would
palliate a licence which the simultaneous absence of abigail and
obstetrician rendered the easier, broke out at once into a strife of
tongues. In vain the voice of Mr Canvasser Bloom was heard endeavouring
to urge, to mollify, to refrain. The moment was too propitious for the
display of that discursiveness which seemed the only bond of union among
tempers so divergent. Every phase of the situation was successively
eviscerated: the prenatal repugnance of uterine brothers, the Caesarean
section, posthumity with respect to the father and, that rarer form,
with respect to the mother, the fratricidal case known as the Childs
Murder and rendered memorable by the impassioned plea of Mr Advocate
Bushe which secured the acquittal of the wrongfully accused, the
rights of primogeniture and king's bounty touching twins and triplets,
miscarriages and infanticides, simulated or dissimulated, the acardiac
_foetus in foetu_ and aprosopia due to a congestion, the agnathia
of certain chinless Chinamen (cited by Mr Candidate Mulligan) in
consequence of defective reunion of the maxillary knobs along the medial
line so that (as he said) one ear could hear what the other spoke, the
benefits of anesthesia or twilight sleep, the prolongation of labour
pains in advanced gravidancy by reason of pressure on the vein, the
premature relentment of the amniotic fluid (as exemplified in the
actual case) with consequent peril of sepsis to the matrix, artificial
insemination by means of syringes, involution of the womb consequent
upon the menopause, the problem of the perpetration of the species in
the case of females impregnated by delinquent rape, that distressing
manner of delivery called by the Brandenburghers _Sturzgeburt,_ the
recorded instances of multiseminal, twikindled and monstrous births
conceived during the catamenic period or of consanguineous parents--in
a word all the cases of human nativity which Aristotle has classified
in his masterpiece with chromolithographic illustrations. The gravest
problems of obstetrics and forensic medicine were examined with as much
animation as the most popular beliefs on the state of pregnancy such as
the forbidding to a gravid woman to step over a countrystile lest,
by her movement, the navelcord should strangle her creature and
the injunction upon her in the event of a yearning, ardently and
ineffectually entertained, to place her hand against that part of her
person which long usage has consecrated as the seat of castigation.
The abnormalities of harelip, breastmole, supernumerary digits, negro's
inkle, strawberry mark and portwine stain were alleged by one as a
_prima facie_ and natural hypothetical explanation of those swineheaded
(the case of Madame Grissel Steevens was not forgotten) or doghaired
infants occasionally born. The hypothesis of a plasmic memory, advanced
by the Caledonian envoy and worthy of the metaphysical traditions of
the land he stood for, envisaged in such cases an arrest of embryonic
development at some stage antecedent to the human. An outlandish
delegate sustained against both these views, with such heat as almost
carried conviction, the theory of copulation between women and the males
of brutes, his authority being his own avouchment in support of fables
such as that of the Minotaur which the genius of the elegant Latin poet
has handed down to us in the pages of his Metamorphoses. The impression
made by his words was immediate but shortlived. It was effaced as easily
as it had been evoked by an allocution from Mr Candidate Mulligan in
that vein of pleasantry which none better than he knew how to affect,
postulating as the supremest object of desire a nice clean old man.
Contemporaneously, a heated argument having arisen between Mr Delegate
Madden and Mr Candidate Lynch regarding the juridical and theological
dilemma created in the event of one Siamese twin predeceasing the other,
the difficulty by mutual consent was referred to Mr Canvasser Bloom
for instant submittal to Mr Coadjutor Deacon Dedalus. Hitherto silent,
whether the better to show by preternatural gravity that curious dignity
of the garb with which he was invested or in obedience to an inward
voice, he delivered briefly and, as some thought, perfunctorily the
ecclesiastical ordinance forbidding man to put asunder what God has
joined.

But Malachias' tale began to freeze them with horror. He conjured up the
scene before them. The secret panel beside the chimney slid back and
in the recess appeared... Haines! Which of us did not feel his flesh
creep! He had a portfolio full of Celtic literature in one hand, in the
other a phial marked _Poison._ Surprise, horror, loathing were depicted
on all faces while he eyed them with a ghostly grin. I anticipated some
such reception, he began with an eldritch laugh, for which, it seems,
history is to blame. Yes, it is true. I am the murderer of Samuel
Childs. And how I am punished! The inferno has no terrors for me. This
is the appearance is on me. Tare and ages, what way would I be resting
at all, he muttered thickly, and I tramping Dublin this while back
with my share of songs and himself after me the like of a soulth or a
bullawurrus? My hell, and Ireland's, is in this life. It is what I tried
to obliterate my crime. Distractions, rookshooting, the Erse language
(he recited some), laudanum (he raised the phial to his lips), camping
out. In vain! His spectre stalks me. Dope is my only hope... Ah!
Destruction! The black panther! With a cry he suddenly vanished and the
panel slid back. An instant later his head appeared in the door opposite
and said: Meet me at Westland Row station at ten past eleven. He was
gone. Tears gushed from the eyes of the dissipated host. The seer
raised his hand to heaven, murmuring: The vendetta of Mananaun! The
sage repeated: _Lex talionis_. The sentimentalist is he who would enjoy
without incurring the immense debtorship for a thing done. Malachias,
overcome by emotion, ceased. The mystery was unveiled. Haines was the
third brother. His real name was Childs. The black panther was himself
the ghost of his own father. He drank drugs to obliterate. For this
relief much thanks. The lonely house by the graveyard is uninhabited.
No soul will live there. The spider pitches her web in the solitude.
The nocturnal rat peers from his hole. A curse is on it. It is haunted.
Murderer's ground.

What is the age of the soul of man? As she hath the virtue of the
chameleon to change her hue at every new approach, to be gay with the
merry and mournful with the downcast, so too is her age changeable as
her mood. No longer is Leopold, as he sits there, ruminating, chewing
the cud of reminiscence, that staid agent of publicity and holder of a
modest substance in the funds. A score of years are blown away. He is
young Leopold. There, as in a retrospective arrangement, a mirror within
a mirror (hey, presto!), he beholdeth himself. That young figure of then
is seen, precociously manly, walking on a nipping morning from the old
house in Clanbrassil street to the high school, his booksatchel on
him bandolierwise, and in it a goodly hunk of wheaten loaf, a mother's
thought. Or it is the same figure, a year or so gone over, in his first
hard hat (ah, that was a day!), already on the road, a fullfledged
traveller for the family firm, equipped with an orderbook, a scented
handkerchief (not for show only), his case of bright trinketware (alas!
a thing now of the past!) and a quiverful of compliant smiles for this
or that halfwon housewife reckoning it out upon her fingertips or for
a budding virgin, shyly acknowledging (but the heart? tell me!) his
studied baisemoins. The scent, the smile, but, more than these, the dark
eyes and oleaginous address, brought home at duskfall many a commission
to the head of the firm, seated with Jacob's pipe after like labours in
the paternal ingle (a meal of noodles, you may be sure, is aheating),
reading through round horned spectacles some paper from the Europe of a
month before. But hey, presto, the mirror is breathed on and the young
knighterrant recedes, shrivels, dwindles to a tiny speck within the
mist. Now he is himself paternal and these about him might be his
sons. Who can say? The wise father knows his own child. He thinks of a
drizzling night in Hatch street, hard by the bonded stores there, the
first. Together (she is a poor waif, a child of shame, yours and mine
and of all for a bare shilling and her luckpenny), together they hear
the heavy tread of the watch as two raincaped shadows pass the new royal
university. Bridie! Bridie Kelly! He will never forget the name, ever
remember the night: first night, the bridenight. They are entwined
in nethermost darkness, the willer with the willed, and in an instant
(_fiat_!) light shall flood the world. Did heart leap to heart? Nay,
fair reader. In a breath 'twas done but--hold! Back! It must not be! In
terror the poor girl flees away through the murk. She is the bride of
darkness, a daughter of night. She dare not bear the sunnygolden babe
of day. No, Leopold. Name and memory solace thee not. That youthful
illusion of thy strength was taken from thee--and in vain. No son of thy
loins is by thee. There is none now to be for Leopold, what Leopold was
for Rudolph.

The voices blend and fuse in clouded silence: silence that is the
infinite of space: and swiftly, silently the soul is wafted over regions
of cycles of generations that have lived. A region where grey twilight
ever descends, never falls on wide sagegreen pasturefields, shedding her
dusk, scattering a perennial dew of stars. She follows her mother with
ungainly steps, a mare leading her fillyfoal. Twilight phantoms
are they, yet moulded in prophetic grace of structure, slim shapely
haunches, a supple tendonous neck, the meek apprehensive skull. They
fade, sad phantoms: all is gone. Agendath is a waste land, a home of
screechowls and the sandblind upupa. Netaim, the golden, is no more. And
on the highway of the clouds they come, muttering thunder of rebellion,
the ghosts of beasts. Huuh! Hark! Huuh! Parallax stalks behind and goads
them, the lancinating lightnings of whose brow are scorpions. Elk and
yak, the bulls of Bashan and of Babylon, mammoth and mastodon, they come
trooping to the sunken sea, _Lacus Mortis_. Ominous revengeful zodiacal
host! They moan, passing upon the clouds, horned and capricorned, the
trumpeted with the tusked, the lionmaned, the giantantlered, snouter
and crawler, rodent, ruminant and pachyderm, all their moving moaning
multitude, murderers of the sun.

Onward to the dead sea they tramp to drink, unslaked and with horrible
gulpings, the salt somnolent inexhaustible flood. And the equine portent
grows again, magnified in the deserted heavens, nay to heaven's own
magnitude, till it looms, vast, over the house of Virgo. And lo, wonder
of metempsychosis, it is she, the everlasting bride, harbinger of the
daystar, the bride, ever virgin. It is she, Martha, thou lost one,
Millicent, the young, the dear, the radiant. How serene does she now
arise, a queen among the Pleiades, in the penultimate antelucan hour,
shod in sandals of bright gold, coifed with a veil of what do you call
it gossamer. It floats, it flows about her starborn flesh and loose it
streams, emerald, sapphire, mauve and heliotrope, sustained on currents
of the cold interstellar wind, winding, coiling, simply swirling,
writhing in the skies a mysterious writing till, after a myriad
metamorphoses of symbol, it blazes, Alpha, a ruby and triangled sign
upon the forehead of Taurus.

Francis was reminding Stephen of years before when they had been at
school together in Conmee's time. He asked about Glaucon, Alcibiades,
Pisistratus. Where were they now? Neither knew. You have spoken of the
past and its phantoms, Stephen said. Why think of them? If I call them
into life across the waters of Lethe will not the poor ghosts troop to
my call? Who supposes it? I, Bous Stephanoumenos, bullockbefriending
bard, am lord and giver of their life. He encircled his gadding hair
with a coronal of vineleaves, smiling at Vincent. That answer and those
leaves, Vincent said to him, will adorn you more fitly when something
more, and greatly more, than a capful of light odes can call your genius
father. All who wish you well hope this for you. All desire to see
you bring forth the work you meditate, to acclaim you Stephaneforos. I
heartily wish you may not fail them. O no, Vincent Lenehan said, laying
a hand on the shoulder near him. Have no fear. He could not leave his
mother an orphan. The young man's face grew dark. All could see how hard
it was for him to be reminded of his promise and of his recent loss. He
would have withdrawn from the feast had not the noise of voices allayed
the smart. Madden had lost five drachmas on Sceptre for a whim of the
rider's name: Lenehan as much more. He told them of the race. The flag
fell and, huuh! off, scamper, the mare ran out freshly with 0. Madden
up. She was leading the field. All hearts were beating. Even Phyllis
could not contain herself. She waved her scarf and cried: Huzzah!
Sceptre wins! But in the straight on the run home when all were in close
order the dark horse Throwaway drew level, reached, outstripped her. All
was lost now. Phyllis was silent: her eyes were sad anemones. Juno, she
cried, I am undone. But her lover consoled her and brought her a bright
casket of gold in which lay some oval sugarplums which she partook. A
tear fell: one only. A whacking fine whip, said Lenehan, is W. Lane.
Four winners yesterday and three today. What rider is like him? Mount
him on the camel or the boisterous buffalo the victory in a hack canter
is still his. But let us bear it as was the ancient wont. Mercy on the
luckless! Poor Sceptre! he said with a light sigh. She is not the filly
that she was. Never, by this hand, shall we behold such another. By gad,
sir, a queen of them. Do you remember her, Vincent? I wish you could
have seen my queen today, Vincent said. How young she was and radiant
(Lalage were scarce fair beside her) in her yellow shoes and frock of
muslin, I do not know the right name of it. The chestnuts that shaded
us were in bloom: the air drooped with their persuasive odour and with
pollen floating by us. In the sunny patches one might easily have
cooked on a stone a batch of those buns with Corinth fruit in them that
Periplipomenes sells in his booth near the bridge. But she had nought
for her teeth but the arm with which I held her and in that she nibbled
mischievously when I pressed too close. A week ago she lay ill, four
days on the couch, but today she was free, blithe, mocked at peril.
She is more taking then. Her posies tool Mad romp that she is, she had
pulled her fill as we reclined together. And in your ear, my friend, you
will not think who met us as we left the field. Conmee himself! He was
walking by the hedge, reading, I think a brevier book with, I doubt not,
a witty letter in it from Glycera or Chloe to keep the page. The sweet
creature turned all colours in her confusion, feigning to reprove a
slight disorder in her dress: a slip of underwood clung there for the
very trees adore her. When Conmee had passed she glanced at her lovely
echo in that little mirror she carries. But he had been kind. In going
by he had blessed us. The gods too are ever kind, Lenehan said. If I had
poor luck with Bass's mare perhaps this draught of his may serve me more
propensely. He was laying his hand upon a winejar: Malachi saw it and
withheld his act, pointing to the stranger and to the scarlet label.
Warily, Malachi whispered, preserve a druid silence. His soul is far
away. It is as painful perhaps to be awakened from a vision as to be
born. Any object, intensely regarded, may be a gate of access to the
incorruptible eon of the gods. Do you not think it, Stephen? Theosophos
told me so, Stephen answered, whom in a previous existence Egyptian
priests initiated into the mysteries of karmic law. The lords of the
moon, Theosophos told me, an orangefiery shipload from planet Alpha
of the lunar chain would not assume the etheric doubles and these
were therefore incarnated by the rubycoloured egos from the second
constellation.

However, as a matter of fact though, the preposterous surmise about him
being in some description of a doldrums or other or mesmerised which
was entirely due to a misconception of the shallowest character, was
not the case at all. The individual whose visual organs while the above
was going on were at this juncture commencing to exhibit symptoms of
animation was as astute if not astuter than any man living and anybody
that conjectured the contrary would have found themselves pretty
speedily in the wrong shop. During the past four minutes or thereabouts
he had been staring hard at a certain amount of number one Bass bottled
by Messrs Bass and Co at Burton-on-Trent which happened to be situated
amongst a lot of others right opposite to where he was and which was
certainly calculated to attract anyone's remark on account of its
scarlet appearance. He was simply and solely, as it subsequently
transpired for reasons best known to himself, which put quite an
altogether different complexion on the proceedings, after the moment
before's observations about boyhood days and the turf, recollecting two
or three private transactions of his own which the other two were as
mutually innocent of as the babe unborn. Eventually, however, both
their eyes met and as soon as it began to dawn on him that the other was
endeavouring to help himself to the thing he involuntarily determined
to help him himself and so he accordingly took hold of the neck of the
mediumsized glass recipient which contained the fluid sought after and
made a capacious hole in it by pouring a lot of it out with, also at the
same time, however, a considerable degree of attentiveness in order not
to upset any of the beer that was in it about the place.

The debate which ensued was in its scope and progress an epitome of the
course of life. Neither place nor council was lacking in dignity. The
debaters were the keenest in the land, the theme they were engaged on
the loftiest and most vital. The high hall of Horne's house had never
beheld an assembly so representative and so varied nor had the
old rafters of that establishment ever listened to a language so
encyclopaedic. A gallant scene in truth it made. Crotthers was there at
the foot of the table in his striking Highland garb, his face glowing
from the briny airs of the Mull of Galloway. There too, opposite to him,
was Lynch whose countenance bore already the stigmata of early depravity
and premature wisdom. Next the Scotchman was the place assigned to
Costello, the eccentric, while at his side was seated in stolid repose
the squat form of Madden. The chair of the resident indeed stood vacant
before the hearth but on either flank of it the figure of Bannon in
explorer's kit of tweed shorts and salted cowhide brogues contrasted
sharply with the primrose elegance and townbred manners of Malachi
Roland St John Mulligan. Lastly at the head of the board was the young
poet who found a refuge from his labours of pedagogy and metaphysical
inquisition in the convivial atmosphere of Socratic discussion, while
to right and left of him were accommodated the flippant prognosticator,
fresh from the hippodrome, and that vigilant wanderer, soiled by the
dust of travel and combat and stained by the mire of an indelible
dishonour, but from whose steadfast and constant heart no lure or peril
or threat or degradation could ever efface the image of that voluptuous
loveliness which the inspired pencil of Lafayette has limned for ages
yet to come.

It had better be stated here and now at the outset that the perverted
transcendentalism to which Mr S. Dedalus' (Div. Scep.) contentions
would appear to prove him pretty badly addicted runs directly counter to
accepted scientific methods. Science, it cannot be too often repeated,
deals with tangible phenomena. The man of science like the man in the
street has to face hardheaded facts that cannot be blinked and explain
them as best he can. There may be, it is true, some questions which
science cannot answer--at present--such as the first problem submitted
by Mr L. Bloom (Pubb. Canv.) regarding the future determination of sex.
Must we accept the view of Empedocles of Trinacria that the right ovary
(the postmenstrual period, assert others) is responsible for the birth
of males or are the too long neglected spermatozoa or nemasperms the
differentiating factors or is it, as most embryologists incline to
opine, such as Culpepper, Spallanzani, Blumenbach, Lusk, Hertwig,
Leopold and Valenti, a mixture of both? This would be tantamount to
a cooperation (one of nature's favourite devices) between the _nisus
formativus_ of the nemasperm on the one hand and on the other a happily
chosen position, _succubitus felix_ of the passive element. The other
problem raised by the same inquirer is scarcely less vital: infant
mortality. It is interesting because, as he pertinently remarks, we
are all born in the same way but we all die in different ways. Mr M.
Mulligan (Hyg. et Eug. Doc.) blames the sanitary conditions in which
our greylunged citizens contract adenoids, pulmonary complaints etc. by
inhaling the bacteria which lurk in dust. These factors, he alleged,
and the revolting spectacles offered by our streets, hideous publicity
posters, religious ministers of all denominations, mutilated soldiers
and sailors, exposed scorbutic cardrivers, the suspended carcases of
dead animals, paranoic bachelors and unfructified duennas--these, he
said, were accountable for any and every fallingoff in the calibre of
the race. Kalipedia, he prophesied, would soon be generally adopted
and all the graces of life, genuinely good music, agreeable literature,
light philosophy, instructive pictures, plastercast reproductions of
the classical statues such as Venus and Apollo, artistic coloured
photographs of prize babies, all these little attentions would enable
ladies who were in a particular condition to pass the intervening months
in a most enjoyable manner. Mr J. Crotthers (Disc. Bacc.) attributes
some of these demises to abdominal trauma in the case of women workers
subjected to heavy labours in the workshop and to marital discipline in
the home but by far the vast majority to neglect, private or official,
culminating in the exposure of newborn infants, the practice of criminal
abortion or in the atrocious crime of infanticide. Although the former
(we are thinking of neglect) is undoubtedly only too true the case he
cites of nurses forgetting to count the sponges in the peritoneal cavity
is too rare to be normative. In fact when one comes to look into it the
wonder is that so many pregnancies and deliveries go off so well as they
do, all things considered and in spite of our human shortcomings which
often baulk nature in her intentions. An ingenious suggestion is
that thrown out by Mr V. Lynch (Bacc. Arith.) that both natality and
mortality, as well as all other phenomena of evolution, tidal movements,
lunar phases, blood temperatures, diseases in general, everything, in
fine, in nature's vast workshop from the extinction of some remote sun
to the blossoming of one of the countless flowers which beautify our
public parks is subject to a law of numeration as yet unascertained.
Still the plain straightforward question why a child of normally healthy
parents and seemingly a healthy child and properly looked after succumbs
unaccountably in early childhood (though other children of the same
marriage do not) must certainly, in the poet's words, give us pause.
Nature, we may rest assured, has her own good and cogent reasons for
whatever she does and in all probability such deaths are due to some law
of anticipation by which organisms in which morbous germs have taken
up their residence (modern science has conclusively shown that only the
plasmic substance can be said to be immortal) tend to disappear at an
increasingly earlier stage of development, an arrangement which, though
productive of pain to some of our feelings (notably the maternal), is
nevertheless, some of us think, in the long run beneficial to the
race in general in securing thereby the survival of the fittest. Mr S.
Dedalus' (Div. Scep.) remark (or should it be called an interruption?)
that an omnivorous being which can masticate, deglute, digest and
apparently pass through the ordinary channel with pluterperfect
imperturbability such multifarious aliments as cancrenous females
emaciated by parturition, corpulent professional gentlemen, not to speak
of jaundiced politicians and chlorotic nuns, might possibly find gastric
relief in an innocent collation of staggering bob, reveals as nought
else could and in a very unsavoury light the tendency above alluded to.
For the enlightenment of those who are not so intimately acquainted with
the minutiae of the municipal abattoir as this morbidminded esthete and
embryo philosopher who for all his overweening bumptiousness in things
scientific can scarcely distinguish an acid from an alkali prides
himself on being, it should perhaps be stated that staggering bob in
the vile parlance of our lowerclass licensed victuallers signifies the
cookable and eatable flesh of a calf newly dropped from its mother. In
a recent public controversy with Mr L. Bloom (Pubb. Canv.) which took
place in the commons' hall of the National Maternity Hospital, 29, 30
and 31 Holles street, of which, as is well known, Dr A. Horne (Lic. in
Midw., F. K. Q. C. P. I.) is the able and popular master, he is reported
by eyewitnesses as having stated that once a woman has let the cat
into the bag (an esthete's allusion, presumably, to one of the most
complicated and marvellous of all nature's processes--the act of sexual
congress) she must let it out again or give it life, as he phrased it,
to save her own. At the risk of her own, was the telling rejoinder of
his interlocutor, none the less effective for the moderate and measured
tone in which it was delivered.

Meanwhile the skill and patience of the physician had brought about a
happy _accouchement._ It had been a weary weary while both for patient
and doctor. All that surgical skill could do was done and the brave
woman had manfully helped. She had. She had fought the good fight and
now she was very very happy. Those who have passed on, who have gone
before, are happy too as they gaze down and smile upon the touching
scene. Reverently look at her as she reclines there with the motherlight
in her eyes, that longing hunger for baby fingers (a pretty sight it is
to see), in the first bloom of her new motherhood, breathing a silent
prayer of thanksgiving to One above, the Universal Husband. And as her
loving eyes behold her babe she wishes only one blessing more, to have
her dear Doady there with her to share her joy, to lay in his arms that
mite of God's clay, the fruit of their lawful embraces. He is older now
(you and I may whisper it) and a trifle stooped in the shoulders yet
in the whirligig of years a grave dignity has come to the conscientious
second accountant of the Ulster bank, College Green branch. O Doady,
loved one of old, faithful lifemate now, it may never be again, that
faroff time of the roses! With the old shake of her pretty head she
recalls those days. God! How beautiful now across the mist of years! But
their children are grouped in her imagination about the bedside, hers
and his, Charley, Mary Alice, Frederick Albert (if he had lived), Mamy,
Budgy (Victoria Frances), Tom, Violet Constance Louisa, darling little
Bobsy (called after our famous hero of the South African war, lord Bobs
of Waterford and Candahar) and now this last pledge of their union, a
Purefoy if ever there was one, with the true Purefoy nose. Young hopeful
will be christened Mortimer Edward after the influential third cousin of
Mr Purefoy in the Treasury Remembrancer's office, Dublin Castle. And so
time wags on: but father Cronion has dealt lightly here. No, let no sigh
break from that bosom, dear gentle Mina. And Doady, knock the ashes from
your pipe, the seasoned briar you still fancy when the curfew rings for
you (may it be the distant day!) and dout the light whereby you read
in the Sacred Book for the oil too has run low, and so with a tranquil
heart to bed, to rest. He knows and will call in His own good time. You
too have fought the good fight and played loyally your man's part. Sir,
to you my hand. Well done, thou good and faithful servant!

There are sins or (let us call them as the world calls them) evil
memories which are hidden away by man in the darkest places of the heart
but they abide there and wait. He may suffer their memory to grow dim,
let them be as though they had not been and all but persuade himself
that they were not or at least were otherwise. Yet a chance word will
call them forth suddenly and they will rise up to confront him in the
most various circumstances, a vision or a dream, or while timbrel
and harp soothe his senses or amid the cool silver tranquility of the
evening or at the feast, at midnight, when he is now filled with wine.
Not to insult over him will the vision come as over one that lies under
her wrath, not for vengeance to cut him off from the living but shrouded
in the piteous vesture of the past, silent, remote, reproachful.

The stranger still regarded on the face before him a slow recession of
that false calm there, imposed, as it seemed, by habit or some studied
trick, upon words so embittered as to accuse in their speaker an
unhealthiness, a _flair,_ for the cruder things of life. A scene
disengages itself in the observer's memory, evoked, it would seem, by
a word of so natural a homeliness as if those days were really present
there (as some thought) with their immediate pleasures. A shaven space
of lawn one soft May evening, the wellremembered grove of lilacs at
Roundtown, purple and white, fragrant slender spectators of the game but
with much real interest in the pellets as they run slowly forward over
the sward or collide and stop, one by its fellow, with a brief alert
shock. And yonder about that grey urn where the water moves at times
in thoughtful irrigation you saw another as fragrant sisterhood, Floey,
Atty, Tiny and their darker friend with I know not what of arresting in
her pose then, Our Lady of the Cherries, a comely brace of them pendent
from an ear, bringing out the foreign warmth of the skin so daintily
against the cool ardent fruit. A lad of four or five in linseywoolsey
(blossomtime but there will be cheer in the kindly hearth when ere long
the bowls are gathered and hutched) is standing on the urn secured by
that circle of girlish fond hands. He frowns a little just as this young
man does now with a perhaps too conscious enjoyment of the danger but
must needs glance at whiles towards where his mother watches from the
PIAZZETTA giving upon the flowerclose with a faint shadow of remoteness
or of reproach (_alles Vergangliche_) in her glad look.

Mark this farther and remember. The end comes suddenly. Enter that
antechamber of birth where the studious are assembled and note their
faces. Nothing, as it seems, there of rash or violent. Quietude of
custody, rather, befitting their station in that house, the vigilant
watch of shepherds and of angels about a crib in Bethlehem of Juda long
ago. But as before the lightning the serried stormclouds, heavy with
preponderant excess of moisture, in swollen masses turgidly distended,
compass earth and sky in one vast slumber, impending above parched field
and drowsy oxen and blighted growth of shrub and verdure till in an
instant a flash rives their centres and with the reverberation of the
thunder the cloudburst pours its torrent, so and not otherwise was the
transformation, violent and instantaneous, upon the utterance of the
word.

Burke's! outflings my lord Stephen, giving the cry, and a tag and
bobtail of all them after, cockerel, jackanapes, welsher, pilldoctor,
punctual Bloom at heels with a universal grabbing at headgear,
ashplants, bilbos, Panama hats and scabbards, Zermatt alpenstocks and
what not. A dedale of lusty youth, noble every student there. Nurse
Callan taken aback in the hallway cannot stay them nor smiling surgeon
coming downstairs with news of placentation ended, a full pound if a
milligramme. They hark him on. The door! It is open? Ha! They are out,
tumultuously, off for a minute's race, all bravely legging it, Burke's
of Denzille and Holles their ulterior goal. Dixon follows giving them
sharp language but raps out an oath, he too, and on. Bloom stays with
nurse a thought to send a kind word to happy mother and nurseling up
there. Doctor Diet and Doctor Quiet. Looks she too not other now? Ward
of watching in Horne's house has told its tale in that washedout pallor.
Then all being gone, a glance of motherwit helping, he whispers close in
going: Madam, when comes the storkbird for thee?

The air without is impregnated with raindew moisture, life essence
celestial, glistening on Dublin stone there under starshiny _coelum._
God's air, the Allfather's air, scintillant circumambient cessile air.
Breathe it deep into thee. By heaven, Theodore Purefoy, thou hast done a
doughty deed and no botch! Thou art, I vow, the remarkablest progenitor
barring none in this chaffering allincluding most farraginous chronicle.
Astounding! In her lay a Godframed Godgiven preformed possibility which
thou hast fructified with thy modicum of man's work. Cleave to her!
Serve! Toil on, labour like a very bandog and let scholarment and all
Malthusiasts go hang. Thou art all their daddies, Theodore. Art drooping
under thy load, bemoiled with butcher's bills at home and ingots (not
thine!) in the countinghouse? Head up! For every newbegotten thou shalt
gather thy homer of ripe wheat. See, thy fleece is drenched. Dost envy
Darby Dullman there with his Joan? A canting jay and a rheumeyed
curdog is all their progeny. Pshaw, I tell thee! He is a mule, a dead
gasteropod, without vim or stamina, not worth a cracked kreutzer.
Copulation without population! No, say I! Herod's slaughter of the
innocents were the truer name. Vegetables, forsooth, and sterile
cohabitation! Give her beefsteaks, red, raw, bleeding! She is a hoary
pandemonium of ills, enlarged glands, mumps, quinsy, bunions, hayfever,
bedsores, ringworm, floating kidney, Derbyshire neck, warts, bilious
attacks, gallstones, cold feet, varicose veins. A truce to threnes and
trentals and jeremies and all such congenital defunctive music! Twenty
years of it, regret them not. With thee it was not as with many that
will and would and wait and never--do. Thou sawest thy America, thy
lifetask, and didst charge to cover like the transpontine bison. How
saith Zarathustra? _Deine Kuh TrÃ¼bsal melkest Du. Nun Trinkst Du die
sÃ¼sse Milch des Euters_. See! it displodes for thee in abundance. Drink,
man, an udderful! Mother's milk, Purefoy, the milk of human kin, milk
too of those burgeoning stars overhead rutilant in thin rainvapour,
punch milk, such as those rioters will quaff in their guzzling den, milk
of madness, the honeymilk of Canaan's land. Thy cow's dug was tough,
what? Ay, but her milk is hot and sweet and fattening. No dollop this
but thick rich bonnyclaber. To her, old patriarch! Pap! _Per deam
Partulam et Pertundam nunc est bibendum_!

All off for a buster, armstrong, hollering down the street. Bonafides.
Where you slep las nigh? Timothy of the battered naggin. Like ole
Billyo. Any brollies or gumboots in the fambly? Where the Henry Nevil's
sawbones and ole clo? Sorra one o' me knows. Hurrah there, Dix! Forward
to the ribbon counter. Where's Punch? All serene. Jay, look at the
drunken minister coming out of the maternity hospal! _Benedicat vos
omnipotens Deus, Pater et Filius_. A make, mister. The Denzille lane
boys. Hell, blast ye! Scoot. Righto, Isaacs, shove em out of the
bleeding limelight. Yous join uz, dear sir? No hentrusion in life. Lou
heap good man. Allee samee dis bunch. _En avant, mes enfants_! Fire
away number one on the gun. Burke's! Burke's! Thence they advanced five
parasangs. Slattery's mounted foot. Where's that bleeding awfur? Parson
Steve, apostates' creed! No, no, Mulligan! Abaft there! Shove ahead.
Keep a watch on the clock. Chuckingout time. Mullee! What's on you? _Ma
mÃ¨re m'a mariÃ©e._ British Beatitudes! _Retamplatan Digidi Boumboum_.
Ayes have it. To be printed and bound at the Druiddrum press by two
designing females. Calf covers of pissedon green. Last word in art
shades. Most beautiful book come out of Ireland my time. _Silentium!_
Get a spurt on. Tention. Proceed to nearest canteen and there annex
liquor stores. March! Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are (atitudes!)
parching. Beer, beef, business, bibles, bulldogs battleships, buggery
and bishops. Whether on the scaffold high. Beer, beef, trample the
bibles. When for Irelandear. Trample the trampellers. Thunderation! Keep
the durned millingtary step. We fall. Bishops boosebox. Halt! Heave to.
Rugger. Scrum in. No touch kicking. Wow, my tootsies! You hurt? Most
amazingly sorry!

Query. Who's astanding this here do? Proud possessor of damnall. Declare
misery. Bet to the ropes. Me nantee saltee. Not a red at me this week
gone. Yours? Mead of our fathers for the _Ãbermensch._ Dittoh. Five
number ones. You, sir? Ginger cordial. Chase me, the cabby's caudle.
Stimulate the caloric. Winding of his ticker. Stopped short never to go
again when the old. Absinthe for me, savvy? _Caramba!_ Have an eggnog or
a prairie oyster. Enemy? Avuncular's got my timepiece. Ten to. Obligated
awful. Don't mention it. Got a pectoral trauma, eh, Dix? Pos fact. Got
bet be a boomblebee whenever he wus settin sleepin in hes bit garten.
Digs up near the Mater. Buckled he is. Know his dona? Yup, sartin I do.
Full of a dure. See her in her dishybilly. Peels off a credit. Lovey
lovekin. None of your lean kine, not much. Pull down the blind, love.
Two Ardilauns. Same here. Look slippery. If you fall don't wait to get
up. Five, seven, nine. Fine! Got a prime pair of mincepies, no kid. And
her take me to rests and her anker of rum. Must be seen to be believed.
Your starving eyes and allbeplastered neck you stole my heart, O
gluepot. Sir? Spud again the rheumatiz? All poppycock, you'll scuse me
saying. For the hoi polloi. I vear thee beest a gert vool. Well, doc?
Back fro Lapland? Your corporosity sagaciating O K? How's the squaws
and papooses? Womanbody after going on the straw? Stand and deliver.
Password. There's hair. Ours the white death and the ruddy birth. Hi!
Spit in your own eye, boss! Mummer's wire. Cribbed out of Meredith.
Jesified, orchidised, polycimical jesuit! Aunty mine's writing Pa Kinch.
Baddybad Stephen lead astray goodygood Malachi.

Hurroo! Collar the leather, youngun. Roun wi the nappy. Here, Jock braw
Hielentman's your barleybree. Lang may your lum reek and your kailpot
boil! My tipple. _Merci._ Here's to us. How's that? Leg before wicket.
Don't stain my brandnew sitinems. Give's a shake of peppe, you there.
Catch aholt. Caraway seed to carry away. Twig? Shrieks of silence. Every
cove to his gentry mort. Venus Pandemos. _Les petites femmes_. Bold bad
girl from the town of Mullingar. Tell her I was axing at her. Hauding
Sara by the wame. On the road to Malahide. Me? If she who seduced me had
left but the name. What do you want for ninepence? Machree, macruiskeen.
Smutty Moll for a mattress jig. And a pull all together. _Ex!_

Waiting, guvnor? Most deciduously. Bet your boots on. Stunned like,
seeing as how no shiners is acoming. Underconstumble? He've got the
chink _ad lib_. Seed near free poun on un a spell ago a said war hisn.
Us come right in on your invite, see? Up to you, matey. Out with the
oof. Two bar and a wing. You larn that go off of they there Frenchy
bilks? Won't wash here for nuts nohow. Lil chile velly solly. Ise de
cutest colour coon down our side. Gawds teruth, Chawley. We are nae fou.
We're nae tha fou. Au reservoir, mossoo. Tanks you.

'Tis, sure. What say? In the speakeasy. Tight. I shee you, shir. Bantam,
two days teetee. Bowsing nowt but claretwine. Garn! Have a glint, do.
Gum, I'm jiggered. And been to barber he have. Too full for words. With
a railway bloke. How come you so? Opera he'd like? Rose of Castile. Rows
of cast. Police! Some H2O for a gent fainted. Look at Bantam's flowers.
Gemini. He's going to holler. The colleen bawn. My colleen bawn. O,
cheese it! Shut his blurry Dutch oven with a firm hand. Had the winner
today till I tipped him a dead cert. The ruffin cly the nab of Stephen
Hand as give me the jady coppaleen. He strike a telegramboy paddock wire
big bug Bass to the depot. Shove him a joey and grahamise. Mare on form
hot order. Guinea to a goosegog. Tell a cram, that. Gospeltrue. Criminal
diversion? I think that yes. Sure thing. Land him in chokeechokee if the
harman beck copped the game. Madden back Madden's a maddening back. O
lust our refuge and our strength. Decamping. Must you go? Off to mammy.
Stand by. Hide my blushes someone. All in if he spots me. Come ahome,
our Bantam. Horryvar, mong vioo. Dinna forget the cowslips for hersel.
Cornfide. Wha gev ye thon colt? Pal to pal. Jannock. Of John Thomas, her
spouse. No fake, old man Leo. S'elp me, honest injun. Shiver my timbers
if I had. There's a great big holy friar. Vyfor you no me tell? Vel,
I ses, if that aint a sheeny nachez, vel, I vil get misha mishinnah.
Through yerd our lord, Amen.

You move a motion? Steve boy, you're going it some. More bluggy
drunkables? Will immensely splendiferous stander permit one stooder of
most extreme poverty and one largesize grandacious thirst to terminate
one expensive inaugurated libation? Give's a breather. Landlord,
landlord, have you good wine, staboo? Hoots, mon, a wee drap to pree.
Cut and come again. Right. Boniface! Absinthe the lot. _Nos omnes
biberimus viridum toxicum diabolus capiat posterioria nostria_.
Closingtime, gents. Eh? Rome boose for the Bloom toff. I hear you say
onions? Bloo? Cadges ads. Photo's papli, by all that's gorgeous. Play
low, pardner. Slide. _Bonsoir la compagnie_. And snares of the poxfiend.
Where's the buck and Namby Amby? Skunked? Leg bail. Aweel, ye maun e'en
gang yer gates. Checkmate. King to tower. Kind Kristyann wil yu help
yung man hoose frend tuk bungellow kee tu find plais whear tu lay crown
of his hed 2 night. Crickey, I'm about sprung. Tarnally dog gone my
shins if this beent the bestest puttiest longbreak yet. Item, curate,
couple of cookies for this child. Cot's plood and prandypalls, none! Not
a pite of sheeses? Thrust syphilis down to hell and with him those other
licensed spirits. Time, gents! Who wander through the world. Health all!
_a la vÃ´tre_!

Golly, whatten tunket's yon guy in the mackintosh? Dusty Rhodes. Peep
at his wearables. By mighty! What's he got? Jubilee mutton. Bovril,
by James. Wants it real bad. D'ye ken bare socks? Seedy cuss in the
Richmond? Rawthere! Thought he had a deposit of lead in his penis.
Trumpery insanity. Bartle the Bread we calls him. That, sir, was once
a prosperous cit. Man all tattered and torn that married a maiden all
forlorn. Slung her hook, she did. Here see lost love. Walking Mackintosh
of lonely canyon. Tuck and turn in. Schedule time. Nix for the hornies.
Pardon? Seen him today at a runefal? Chum o' yourn passed in his checks?
Ludamassy! Pore piccaninnies! Thou'll no be telling me thot, Pold veg!
Did ums blubble bigsplash crytears cos fren Padney was took off in black
bag? Of all de darkies Massa Pat was verra best. I never see the like
since I was born. _Tiens, tiens_, but it is well sad, that, my faith,
yes. O, get, rev on a gradient one in nine. Live axle drives are souped.
Lay you two to one Jenatzy licks him ruddy well hollow. Jappies? High
angle fire, inyah! Sunk by war specials. Be worse for him, says he, nor
any Rooshian. Time all. There's eleven of them. Get ye gone. Forward,
woozy wobblers! Night. Night. May Allah the Excellent One your soul this
night ever tremendously conserve.

Your attention! We're nae tha fou. The Leith police dismisseth us. The
least tholice. Ware hawks for the chap puking. Unwell in his abominable
regions. Yooka. Night. Mona, my true love. Yook. Mona, my own love. Ook.

Hark! Shut your obstropolos. Pflaap! Pflaap! Blaze on. There she goes.
Brigade! Bout ship. Mount street way. Cut up! Pflaap! Tally ho. You not
come? Run, skelter, race. Pflaaaap!

Lynch! Hey? Sign on long o' me. Denzille lane this way. Change here for
Bawdyhouse. We two, she said, will seek the kips where shady Mary is.
Righto, any old time. _Laetabuntur in cubilibus suis_. You coming long?
Whisper, who the sooty hell's the johnny in the black duds? Hush! Sinned
against the light and even now that day is at hand when he shall come to
judge the world by fire. Pflaap! _Ut implerentur scripturae_. Strike
up a ballad. Then outspake medical Dick to his comrade medical Davy.
Christicle, who's this excrement yellow gospeller on the Merrion
hall? Elijah is coming! Washed in the blood of the Lamb. Come on you
winefizzling, ginsizzling, booseguzzling existences! Come on, you
dog-gone, bullnecked, beetlebrowed, hogjowled, peanutbrained, weaseleyed
fourflushers, false alarms and excess baggage! Come on, you triple
extract of infamy! Alexander J Christ Dowie, that's my name, that's
yanked to glory most half this planet from Frisco beach to Vladivostok.
The Deity aint no nickel dime bumshow. I put it to you that He's on the
square and a corking fine business proposition. He's the grandest thing
yet and don't you forget it. Shout salvation in King Jesus. You'll
need to rise precious early you sinner there, if you want to diddle the
Almighty God. Pflaaaap! Not half. He's got a coughmixture with a punch
in it for you, my friend, in his back pocket. Just you try it on.



_The Mabbot street entrance of nighttown, before which stretches
an uncobbled tramsiding set with skeleton tracks, red and green
will-o'-the-wisps and danger signals. Rows of grimy houses with gaping
doors. Rare lamps with faint rainbow fins. Round Rabaiotti's halted ice
gondola stunted men and women squabble. They grab wafers between which
are wedged lumps of coral and copper snow. Sucking, they scatter slowly.
Children. The swancomb of the gondola, highreared, forges on through the
murk, white and blue under a lighthouse. Whistles call and answer._

THE CALLS: Wait, my love, and I'll be with you.

THE ANSWERS: Round behind the stable.

_(A deafmute idiot with goggle eyes, his shapeless mouth dribbling,
jerks past, shaken in Saint Vitus' dance. A chain of children 's hands
imprisons him.)_

THE CHILDREN: Kithogue! Salute!

THE IDIOT: _(Lifts a palsied left arm and gurgles)_ Grhahute!

THE CHILDREN: Where's the great light?

THE IDIOT: _(Gobbing)_ Ghaghahest.

_(They release him. He jerks on. A pigmy woman swings on a rope slung
between two railings, counting. A form sprawled against a dustbin and
muffled by its arm and hat snores, groans, grinding growling teeth, and
snores again. On a step a gnome totting among a rubbishtip crouches
to shoulder a sack of rags and bones. A crone standing by with a smoky
oillamp rams her last bottle in the maw of his sack. He heaves his
booty, tugs askew his peaked cap and hobbles off mutely. The crone
makes back for her lair, swaying her lamp. A bandy child, asquat on the
doorstep with a paper shuttlecock, crawls sidling after her in spurts,
clutches her skirt, scrambles up. A drunken navvy grips with both hands
the railings of an area, lurching heavily. At a comer two night watch in
shouldercapes, their hands upon their staffholsters, loom tall. A plate
crashes: a woman screams: a child wails. Oaths of a man roar, mutter,
cease. Figures wander, lurk, peer from warrens. In a room lit by a
candle stuck in a bottleneck a slut combs out the tatts from the hair
of a scrofulous child. Cissy Caffrey's voice, still young, sings shrill
from a lane.)_

CISSY CAFFREY:

     _I gave it to Molly
     Because she was jolly,
     The leg of the duck,
     The leg of the duck._

_(Private Carr and Private Compton, swaggersticks tight in their oxters,
as they march unsteadily rightaboutface and burst together from their
mouths a volleyed fart. Laughter of men from the lane. A hoarse virago
retorts.)_

THE VIRAGO: Signs on you, hairy arse. More power the Cavan girl.

CISSY CAFFREY: More luck to me. Cavan, Cootehill and Belturbet. _(She
sings)_

     _I gave it to Nelly
     To stick in her belly,
     The leg of the duck,
     The leg of the duck._

_(Private Carr and Private Compton turn and counterretort, their tunics
bloodbright in a lampglow, black sockets of caps on their blond cropped
polls. Stephen Dedalus and Lynch pass through the crowd close to the
redcoats.)_

PRIVATE COMPTON: _(Jerks his finger)_ Way for the parson.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Turns and calls)_ What ho, parson!

CISSY CAFFREY: _(Her voice soaring higher)_

     _She has it, she got it,
     Wherever she put it,
     The leg of the duck._

_(Stephen, flourishing the ashplant in his left hand, chants with joy
the_ introit _for paschal time. Lynch, his jockeycap low on his brow,
attends him, a sneer of discontent wrinkling his face.)_

STEPHEN: _Vidi aquam egredientem de templo a latere dextro. Alleluia_.

_(The famished snaggletusks of an elderly bawd protrude from a
doorway.)_

THE BAWD: _(Her voice whispering huskily)_ Sst! Come here till I tell
you. Maidenhead inside. Sst!

STEPHEN: _(Altius aliquantulum) Et omnes ad quos pervenit aqua ista_.

THE BAWD: _(Spits in their trail her jet of venom)_ Trinity medicals.
Fallopian tube. All prick and no pence.

_(Edy Boardman, sniffling, crouched with bertha supple, draws her shawl
across her nostrils.)_

EDY BOARDMAN: _(Bickering)_ And says the one: I seen you up Faithful
place with your squarepusher, the greaser off the railway, in his
cometobed hat. Did you, says I. That's not for you to say, says I. You
never seen me in the mantrap with a married highlander, says I. The
likes of her! Stag that one is! Stubborn as a mule! And her walking with
two fellows the one time, Kilbride, the enginedriver, and lancecorporal
Oliphant.

STEPHEN: _(Ttriumphaliter) Salvi facti sunt._

_(He flourishes his ashplant, shivering the lamp image, shattering light
over the world. A liver and white spaniel on the prowl slinks after him,
growling. Lynch scares it with a kick.)_

LYNCH: So that?

STEPHEN: (_Looks behind_) So that gesture, not music not odour, would be
a universal language, the gift of tongues rendering visible not the lay
sense but the first entelechy, the structural rhythm.

LYNCH: Pornosophical philotheology. Metaphysics in Mecklenburgh street!

STEPHEN: We have shrewridden Shakespeare and henpecked Socrates. Even
the allwisest Stagyrite was bitted, bridled and mounted by a light of
love.

LYNCH: Ba!

STEPHEN: Anyway, who wants two gestures to illustrate a loaf and a jug?
This movement illustrates the loaf and jug of bread or wine in Omar.
Hold my stick.

LYNCH: Damn your yellow stick. Where are we going?

STEPHEN: Lecherous lynx, _to la belle dame sans merci,_ Georgina
Johnson, _ad deam qui laetificat iuventutem meam._

_(Stephen thrusts the ashplant on him and slowly holds out his hands,
his head going back till both hands are a span from his breast, down
turned, in planes intersecting, the fingers about to part, the left
being higher.)_

LYNCH: Which is the jug of bread? It skills not. That or the
customhouse. Illustrate thou. Here take your crutch and walk.

_(They pass. Tommy Caffrey scrambles to a gaslamp and, clasping, climbs
in spasms. From the top spur he slides down. Jacky Caffrey clasps to
climb. The navvy lurches against the lamp. The twins scuttle off in the
dark. The navvy, swaying, presses a forefinger against a wing of his
nose and ejects from the farther nostril a long liquid jet of snot.
Shouldering the lamp he staggers away through the crowd with his flaring
cresset._

_Snakes of river fog creep slowly. From drains, clefts, cesspools,
middens arise on all sides stagnant fumes. A glow leaps in the south
beyond the seaward reaches of the river. The navvy, staggering forward,
cleaves the crowd and lurches towards the tramsiding on the farther side
under the railway bridge bloom appears, flushed, panting, cramming bread
and chocolate into a sidepocket. From Gillen's hairdresser's window a
composite portrait shows him gallant Nelson's image. A concave mirror
at the side presents to him lovelorn longlost lugubru Booloohoom. Grave
Gladstone sees him level, Bloom for Bloom. he passes, struck by the
stare of truculent Wellington, but in the convex mirror grin unstruck
the bonham eyes and fatchuck cheekchops of Jollypoldy the rixdix doldy._

_At Antonio Pabaiotti's door Bloom halts, sweated under the bright
arclamp. He disappears. In a moment he reappears and hurries on.)_

BLOOM: Fish and taters. N. g. Ah!

_(He disappears into Olhausen's, the porkbutcher's, under the downcoming
rollshutter. A few moments later he emerges from under the shutter,
puffing Poldy, blowing Bloohoom. In each hand he holds a parcel, one
containing a lukewarm pig's crubeen, the other a cold sheep's trotter,
sprinkled with wholepepper. He gasps, standing upright. Then bending to
one side he presses a parcel against his ribs and groans.)_

BLOOM: Stitch in my side. Why did I run?

_(He takes breath with care and goes forward slowly towards the lampset
siding. The glow leaps again.)_

BLOOM: What is that? A flasher? Searchlight.

_(He stands at Cormack's corner, watching)_

BLOOM: _Aurora borealis_ or a steel foundry? Ah, the brigade, of course.
South side anyhow. Big blaze. Might be his house. Beggar's bush. We're
safe. _(He hums cheerfully)_ London's burning, London's burning! On
fire, on fire! (_He catches sight of the navvy lurching through the
crowd at the farther side of Talbot street_) I'll miss him. Run. Quick.
Better cross here.

_(He darts to cross the road. Urchins shout.)_

THE URCHINS: Mind out, mister! (_Two cyclists, with lighted paper
lanterns aswing, swim by him, grazing him, their bells rattling_)

THE BELLS: Haltyaltyaltyall.

BLOOM: _(Halts erect, stung by a spasm)_ Ow!

_(He looks round, darts forward suddenly. Through rising fog a dragon
sandstrewer, travelling at caution, slews heavily down upon him,
its huge red headlight winking, its trolley hissing on the wire. The
motorman bangs his footgong.)_

THE GONG: Bang Bang Bla Bak Blud Bugg Bloo.

_(The brake cracks violently. Bloom, raising a policeman's whitegloved
hand, blunders stifflegged out of the track. The motorman, thrown
forward, pugnosed, on the guidewheel, yells as he slides past over
chains and keys.)_

THE MOTORMAN: Hey, shitbreeches, are you doing the hat trick?

BLOOM: _(Bloom trickleaps to the curbstone and halts again. He brushes a
mudflake from his cheek with a parcelled hand.)_ No thoroughfare. Close
shave that but cured the stitch. Must take up Sandow's exercises again.
On the hands down. Insure against street accident too. The Providential.
_(He feels his trouser pocket)_ Poor mamma's panacea. Heel easily catch
in track or bootlace in a cog. Day the wheel of the black Maria peeled
off my shoe at Leonard's corner. Third time is the charm. Shoe trick.
Insolent driver. I ought to report him. Tension makes them nervous.
Might be the fellow balked me this morning with that horsey woman. Same
style of beauty. Quick of him all the same. The stiff walk. True word
spoken in jest. That awful cramp in Lad lane. Something poisonous I
ate. Emblem of luck. Why? Probably lost cattle. Mark of the beast. _(He
closes his eyes an instant)_ Bit light in the head. Monthly or effect of
the other. Brainfogfag. That tired feeling. Too much for me now. Ow!

(A sinister figure leans on plaited legs against o'beirne's wall, a
visage unknown, injected with dark mercury. From under a wideleaved
sombrero the figure regards him with evil eye.)

BLOOM: _Buenas noches, seÃ±orita Blanca, que calle es esta?_

THE FIGURE: (_Impassive, raises a signal arm_) Password. _Sraid Mabbot._

BLOOM: Haha. _Merci._ Esperanto. _Slan leath. (He mutters)_ Gaelic
league spy, sent by that fireeater.

_(He steps forward. A sackshouldered ragman bars his path. He steps
left, ragsackman left.)_

BLOOM: I beg. (_He swerves, sidles, stepaside, slips past and on_.)

BLOOM: Keep to the right, right, right. If there is a signpost planted
by the Touring Club at Stepaside who procured that public boon? I who
lost my way and contributed to the columns of the _Irish Cyclist_ the
letter headed _In darkest Stepaside_. Keep, keep, keep to the right.
Rags and bones at midnight. A fence more likely. First place murderer
makes for. Wash off his sins of the world.

_(Jacky Caffrey, hunted by Tommy Caffrey, runs full tilt against
Bloom.)_

BLOOM: O

_(Shocked, on weak hams, he halts. Tommy and Jacky vanish there, there.
Bloom pats with parcelled hands watch fobpocket, bookpocket, pursepoket,
sweets of sin, potato soap.)_

BLOOM: Beware of pickpockets. Old thieves' dodge. Collide. Then snatch
your purse.

_(The retriever approaches sniffing, nose to the ground. A sprawled form
sneezes. A stooped bearded figure appears garbed in the long caftan
of an elder in Zion and a smokingcap with magenta tassels. Horned
spectacles hang down at the wings of the nose. Yellow poison streaks are
on the drawn face.)_

RUDOLPH: Second halfcrown waste money today. I told you not go with
drunken goy ever. So you catch no money.

BLOOM: _(Hides the crubeen and trotter behind his back and, crestfallen,
feels warm and cold feetmeat) Ja, ich weiss, papachi._

RUDOLPH: What you making down this place? Have you no soul? _(with
feeble vulture talons he feels the silent face of Bloom)_ Are you not
my son Leopold, the grandson of Leopold? Are you not my dear son Leopold
who left the house of his father and left the god of his fathers Abraham
and Jacob?

BLOOM: _(With precaution)_ I suppose so, father. Mosenthal. All that's
left of him.

RUDOLPH: _(Severely)_ One night they bring you home drunk as dog after
spend your good money. What you call them running chaps?

BLOOM: _(In youth's smart blue Oxford suit with white vestslips,
narrowshouldered, in brown Alpine hat, wearing gent's sterling silver
waterbury keyless watch and double curb Albert with seal attached, one
side of him coated with stiffening mud)_ Harriers, father. Only that
once.

RUDOLPH: Once! Mud head to foot. Cut your hand open. Lockjaw. They make
you kaputt, Leopoldleben. You watch them chaps.

BLOOM: _(Weakly)_ They challenged me to a sprint. It was muddy. I
slipped.

RUDOLPH: _(With contempt) Goim nachez_! Nice spectacles for your poor
mother!

BLOOM: Mamma!

ELLEN BLOOM: _(In pantomime dame's stringed mobcap, widow Twankey's
crinoline and bustle, blouse with muttonleg sleeves buttoned behind,
grey mittens and cameo brooch, her plaited hair in a crispine net,
appears over the staircase banisters, a slanted candlestick in her hand,
and cries out in shrill alarm)_ O blessed Redeemer, what have they done
to him! My smelling salts! _(She hauls up a reef of skirt and ransacks
the pouch of her striped blay petticoat. A phial, an Agnus Dei, a
shrivelled potato and a celluloid doll fall out)_ Sacred Heart of Mary,
where were you at all at all?

_(Bloom, mumbling, his eyes downcast, begins to bestow his parcels in
his filled pockets but desists, muttering.)_

A VOICE: _(Sharply)_ Poldy!

BLOOM: Who? _(He ducks and wards off a blow clumsily)_ At your service.

_(He looks up. Beside her mirage of datepalms a handsome woman in
Turkish costume stands before him. Opulent curves fill out her scarlet
trousers and jacket, slashed with gold. A wide yellow cummerbund girdles
her. A white yashmak, violet in the night, covers her face, leaving free
only her large dark eyes and raven hair.)_

BLOOM: Molly!

MARION: Welly? Mrs Marion from this out, my dear man, when you speak to
me. _(Satirically)_ Has poor little hubby cold feet waiting so long?

BLOOM: _(Shifts from foot to foot)_ No, no. Not the least little bit.

_(He breathes in deep agitation, swallowing gulps of air, questions,
hopes, crubeens for her supper, things to tell her, excuse, desire,
spellbound. A coin gleams on her forehead. On her feet are jewelled
toerings. Her ankles are linked by a slender fetterchain. Beside her
a camel, hooded with a turreting turban, waits. A silk ladder of
innumerable rungs climbs to his bobbing howdah. He ambles near with
disgruntled hindquarters. Fiercely she slaps his haunch, her goldcurb
wristbangles angriling, scolding him in Moorish.)_

MARION: Nebrakada! Femininum!

_(The camel, lifting a foreleg, plucks from a tree a large mango fruit,
offers it to his mistress, blinking, in his cloven hoof, then droops his
head and, grunting, with uplifted neck, fumbles to kneel. Bloom stoops
his back for leapfrog.)_

BLOOM: I can give you... I mean as your business menagerer... Mrs
Marion... if you...

MARION: So you notice some change? _(Her hands passing slowly over her
trinketed stomacher, a slow friendly mockery in her eyes)_ O Poldy,
Poldy, you are a poor old stick in the mud! Go and see life. See the
wide world.

BLOOM: I was just going back for that lotion whitewax, orangeflower
water. Shop closes early on Thursday. But the first thing in the
morning. _(He pats divers pockets)_ This moving kidney. Ah!

_(He points to the south, then to the east. A cake of new clean lemon
soap arises, diffusing light and perfume.)_

THE SOAP: We're a capital couple are Bloom and I. He brightens the
earth. I polish the sky.


_(The freckled face of Sweny, the druggist, appears in the disc of the
soapsun.)_

SWENY: Three and a penny, please.

BLOOM: Yes. For my wife. Mrs Marion. Special recipe.

MARION: _(Softly)_ Poldy!

BLOOM: Yes, ma'am?

MARION: _ti trema un poco il cuore?_

_(In disdain she saunters away, plump as a pampered pouter pigeon,
humming the duet from_ Don Giovanni.)

BLOOM: Are you sure about that _voglio_? I mean the pronunciati...

_(He follows, followed by the sniffing terrier. The elderly bawd seizes
his sleeve, the bristles of her chinmole glittering.)_

THE BAWD: Ten shillings a maidenhead. Fresh thing was never touched.
Fifteen. There's no-one in it only her old father that's dead drunk.

_(She points. In the gap of her dark den furtive, rainbedraggled, Bridie
Kelly stands.)_

BRIDIE: Hatch street. Any good in your mind?

_(With a squeak she flaps her bat shawl and runs. A burly rough pursues
with booted strides. He stumbles on the steps, recovers, plunges into
gloom. Weak squeaks of laughter are heard, weaker.)_

THE BAWD: _(Her wolfeyes shining)_ He's getting his pleasure. You won't
get a virgin in the flash houses. Ten shillings. Don't be all night
before the polis in plain clothes sees us. Sixtyseven is a bitch.

_(Leering, Gerty Macdowell limps forward. She draws from behind, ogling,
and shows coyly her bloodied clout.)_

GERTY: With all my worldly goods I thee and thou. _(She murmurs)_ You
did that. I hate you.

BLOOM: I? When? You're dreaming. I never saw you.

THE BAWD: Leave the gentleman alone, you cheat. Writing the gentleman
false letters. Streetwalking and soliciting. Better for your mother take
the strap to you at the bedpost, hussy like you.

GERTY: _(To Bloom)_ When you saw all the secrets of my bottom drawer.
_(She paws his sleeve, slobbering)_ Dirty married man! I love you for
doing that to me.

_(She glides away crookedly. Mrs Breen in man's frieze overcoat
with loose bellows pockets, stands in the causeway, her roguish eyes
wideopen, smiling in all her herbivorous buckteeth.)_

MRS BREEN: Mr...

BLOOM: _(Coughs gravely)_ Madam, when we last had this pleasure by
letter dated the sixteenth instant...

MRS BREEN: Mr Bloom! You down here in the haunts of sin! I caught you
nicely! Scamp!

BLOOM: _(Hurriedly)_ Not so loud my name. Whatever do you think of me?
Don't give me away. Walls have ears. How do you do? It's ages since I.
You're looking splendid. Absolutely it. Seasonable weather we are having
this time of year. Black refracts heat. Short cut home here. Interesting
quarter. Rescue of fallen women. Magdalen asylum. I am the secretary...

MRS BREEN: _(Holds up a finger)_ Now, don't tell a big fib! I know
somebody won't like that. O just wait till I see Molly! _(Slily)_
Account for yourself this very sminute or woe betide you!

BLOOM: _(Looks behind)_ She often said she'd like to visit. Slumming.
The exotic, you see. Negro servants in livery too if she had money.
Othello black brute. Eugene Stratton. Even the bones and cornerman at
the Livermore christies. Bohee brothers. Sweep for that matter.

_(Tom and Sam Bohee, coloured coons in white duck suits, scarlet socks,
upstarched Sambo chokers and large scarlet asters in their buttonholes,
leap out. Each has his banjo slung. Their paler smaller negroid hands
jingle the twingtwang wires. Flashing white Kaffir eyes and tusks they
rattle through a breakdown in clumsy clogs, twinging, singing, back to
back, toe heel, heel toe, with smackfatclacking nigger lips.)_

TOM AND SAM:

     There's someone in the house with Dina
     There's someone in the house, I know,
     There's someone in the house with Dina
     Playing on the old banjo.

_(They whisk black masks from raw babby faces: then, chuckling,
chortling, trumming, twanging, they diddle diddle cakewalk dance away.)_

BLOOM: _(With a sour tenderish smile)_ A little frivol, shall we, if
you are so inclined? Would you like me perhaps to embrace you just for a
fraction of a second?

MRS BREEN: _(Screams gaily)_ O, you ruck! You ought to see yourself!

BLOOM: For old sake' sake. I only meant a square party, a mixed marriage
mingling of our different little conjugials. You know I had a soft
corner for you. _(Gloomily)_ 'Twas I sent you that valentine of the dear
gazelle.

MRS BREEN: Glory Alice, you do look a holy show! Killing simply. _(She
puts out her hand inquisitively)_ What are you hiding behind your back?
Tell us, there's a dear.

BLOOM: _(Seizes her wrist with his free hand)_ Josie Powell that was,
prettiest deb in Dublin. How time flies by! Do you remember, harking
back in a retrospective arrangement, Old Christmas night, Georgina
Simpson's housewarming while they were playing the Irving Bishop game,
finding the pin blindfold and thoughtreading? Subject, what is in this
snuffbox?

MRS BREEN: You were the lion of the night with your seriocomic
recitation and you looked the part. You were always a favourite with the
ladies.

BLOOM: _(Squire of dames, in dinner jacket with wateredsilk facings,
blue masonic badge in his buttonhole, black bow and mother-of-pearl
studs, a prismatic champagne glass tilted in his hand)_ Ladies and
gentlemen, I give you Ireland, home and beauty.

MRS BREEN: The dear dead days beyond recall. Love's old sweet song.

BLOOM: _(Meaningfully dropping his voice)_ I confess I'm teapot with
curiosity to find out whether some person's something is a little teapot
at present.

MRS BREEN: _(Gushingly)_ Tremendously teapot! London's teapot and I'm
simply teapot all over me! _(She rubs sides with him)_ After the parlour
mystery games and the crackers from the tree we sat on the staircase
ottoman. Under the mistletoe. Two is company.

BLOOM: _(Wearing a purple Napoleon hat with an amber halfmoon, his
fingers and thumb passing slowly down to her soft moist meaty palm which
she surrenders gently)_ The witching hour of night. I took the splinter
out of this hand, carefully, slowly. _(Tenderly, as he slips on her
finger a ruby ring) LÃ  ci darem la mano._

MRS BREEN: _(In a onepiece evening frock executed in moonlight blue, a
tinsel sylph's diadem on her brow with her dancecard fallen beside
her moonblue satin slipper, curves her palm softly, breathing quickly)
Voglio e non._ You're hot! You're scalding! The left hand nearest the
heart.

BLOOM: When you made your present choice they said it was beauty and
the beast. I can never forgive you for that. _(His clenched fist at
his brow)_ Think what it means. All you meant to me then. _(Hoarsely)_
Woman, it's breaking me!

_(Denis Breen, whitetallhatted, with Wisdom Hely's sandwich-boards,
shuffles past them in carpet slippers, his dull beard thrust out,
muttering to right and left. Little Alf Bergan, cloaked in the pall of
the ace of spades, dogs him to left and right, doubled in laughter.)_

ALF BERGAN: _(Points jeering at the sandwichboards)_ U. p: Up.

MRS BREEN: _(To Bloom)_ High jinks below stairs. _(She gives him the
glad eye)_ Why didn't you kiss the spot to make it well? You wanted to.

BLOOM: _(Shocked)_ Molly's best friend! Could you?

MRS BREEN: _(Her pulpy tongue between her lips, offers a pigeon kiss)_
Hnhn. The answer is a lemon. Have you a little present for me there?

BLOOM: _(Offhandedly)_ Kosher. A snack for supper. The home without
potted meat is incomplete. I was at _Leah._ Mrs Bandmann Palmer.
Trenchant exponent of Shakespeare. Unfortunately threw away the
programme. Rattling good place round there for pigs' feet. Feel.

_(Richie Goulding, three ladies' hats pinned on his head, appears
weighted to one side by the black legal bag of Collis and Ward on which
a skull and crossbones are painted in white limewash. He opens it
and shows it full of polonies, kippered herrings, Findon haddies and
tightpacked pills.)_

RICHIE: Best value in Dub.

_(Bald Pat, bothered beetle, stands on the curbstone, folding his
napkin, waiting to wait.)_

PAT: _(Advances with a tilted dish of spillspilling gravy)_ Steak and
kidney. Bottle of lager. Hee hee hee. Wait till I wait.

RICHIE: Goodgod. Inev erate inall...

_(With hanging head he marches doggedly forward. The navvy, lurching by,
gores him with his flaming pronghorn.)_

RICHIE: _(With a cry of pain, his hand to his back)_ Ah! Bright's!
Lights!

BLOOM: _(Ooints to the navvy)_ A spy. Don't attract attention. I hate
stupid crowds. I am not on pleasure bent. I am in a grave predicament.

MRS BREEN: Humbugging and deluthering as per usual with your cock and
bull story.

BLOOM: I want to tell you a little secret about how I came to be here.
But you must never tell. Not even Molly. I have a most particular
reason.

MRS BREEN: _(All agog)_ O, not for worlds.

BLOOM: Let's walk on. Shall us?

MRS BREEN: Let's.

_(The bawd makes an unheeded sign. Bloom walks on with Mrs Breen. The
terrier follows, whining piteously, wagging his tail.)_

THE BAWD: Jewman's melt!

BLOOM: _(In an oatmeal sporting suit, a sprig of woodbine in the lapel,
tony buff shirt, shepherd's plaid Saint Andrew's cross scarftie, white
spats, fawn dustcoat on his arm, tawny red brogues, fieldglasses in
bandolier and a grey billycock hat)_ Do you remember a long long time,
years and years ago, just after Milly, Marionette we called her, was
weaned when we all went together to Fairyhouse races, was it?

MRS BREEN: _(In smart Saxe tailormade, white velours hat and spider
veil)_ Leopardstown.

BLOOM: I mean, Leopardstown. And Molly won seven shillings on a three
year old named Nevertell and coming home along by Foxrock in that old
fiveseater shanderadan of a waggonette you were in your heyday then and
you had on that new hat of white velours with a surround of molefur that
Mrs Hayes advised you to buy because it was marked down to nineteen and
eleven, a bit of wire and an old rag of velveteen, and I'll lay you what
you like she did it on purpose...

MRS BREEN: She did, of course, the cat! Don't tell me! Nice adviser!

BLOOM: Because it didn't suit you one quarter as well as the other ducky
little tammy toque with the bird of paradise wing in it that I admired
on you and you honestly looked just too fetching in it though it was a
pity to kill it, you cruel naughty creature, little mite of a thing with
a heart the size of a fullstop.

MRS BREEN: _(Squeezes his arm, simpers)_ Naughty cruel I was!

BLOOM: _(Low, secretly, ever more rapidly)_ And Molly was eating a
sandwich of spiced beef out of Mrs Joe Gallaher's lunch basket. Frankly,
though she had her advisers or admirers, I never cared much for her
style. She was...

MRS BREEN: Too...

BLOOM: Yes. And Molly was laughing because Rogers and Maggot O'Reilly
were mimicking a cock as we passed a farmhouse and Marcus Tertius Moses,
the tea merchant, drove past us in a gig with his daughter, Dancer Moses
was her name, and the poodle in her lap bridled up and you asked me if I
ever heard or read or knew or came across...

MRS BREEN: _(Eagerly)_ Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.

_(She fades from his side. Followed by the whining dog he walks on
towards hellsgates. In an archway a standing woman, bent forward, her
feet apart, pisses cowily. Outside a shuttered pub a bunch of loiterers
listen to a tale which their brokensnouted gaffer rasps out with raucous
humour. An armless pair of them flop wrestling, growling, in maimed
sodden playfight.)_

THE GAFFER: _(Crouches, his voice twisted in his snout)_ And when Cairns
came down from the scaffolding in Beaver street what was he after doing
it into only into the bucket of porter that was there waiting on the
shavings for Derwan's plasterers.

THE LOITERERS: _(Guffaw with cleft palates)_ O jays!

_(Their paintspeckled hats wag. Spattered with size and lime of their
lodges they frisk limblessly about him.)_

BLOOM: Coincidence too. They think it funny. Anything but that. Broad
daylight. Trying to walk. Lucky no woman.

THE LOITERERS: Jays, that's a good one. Glauber salts. O jays, into the
men's porter.

_(Bloom passes. Cheap whores, singly, coupled, shawled, dishevelled,
call from lanes, doors, corners.)_

THE WHORES:

     Are you going far, queer fellow?
     How's your middle leg?
     Got a match on you?
     Eh, come here till I stiffen it for you.


_(He plodges through their sump towards the lighted street beyond. From
a bulge of window curtains a gramophone rears a battered brazen trunk.
In the shadow a shebeenkeeper haggles with the navvy and the two
redcoats.)_

THE NAVVY: _(Belching)_ Where's the bloody house?

THE SHEBEENKEEPER: Purdon street. Shilling a bottle of stout.
Respectable woman.

THE NAVVY: _(Gripping the two redcoats, staggers forward with them)_
Come on, you British army!

PRIVATE CARR: _(Behind his back)_ He aint half balmy.

PRIVATE COMPTON: _(Laughs)_ What ho!

PRIVATE CARR: _(To the navvy)_ Portobello barracks canteen. You ask for
Carr. Just Carr.

THE NAVVY: _(Shouts)_

We are the boys. Of Wexford.

PRIVATE COMPTON: Say! What price the sergeantmajor?

PRIVATE CARR: Bennett? He's my pal. I love old Bennett.

THE NAVVY: _(Shouts)_

     The galling chain.
     And free our native land.

_(He staggers forward, dragging them with him. Bloom stops, at fault.
The dog approaches, his tongue outlolling, panting)_

BLOOM: Wildgoose chase this. Disorderly houses. Lord knows where they
are gone. Drunks cover distance double quick. Nice mixup. Scene at
Westland row. Then jump in first class with third ticket. Then too far.
Train with engine behind. Might have taken me to Malahide or a siding
for the night or collision. Second drink does it. Once is a dose. What
am I following him for? Still, he's the best of that lot. If I hadn't
heard about Mrs Beaufoy Purefoy I wouldn't have gone and wouldn't have
met. Kismet. He'll lose that cash. Relieving office here. Good biz for
cheapjacks, organs. What do ye lack? Soon got, soon gone. Might have
lost my life too with that mangongwheeltracktrolleyglarejuggernaut only
for presence of mind. Can't always save you, though. If I had passed
Truelock's window that day two minutes later would have been shot.
Absence of body. Still if bullet only went through my coat get damages
for shock, five hundred pounds. What was he? Kildare street club toff.
God help his gamekeeper.

_(He gazes ahead, reading on the wall a scrawled chalk legend_ Wet Dream
_and a phallic design._) Odd! Molly drawing on the frosted carriagepane
at Kingstown. What's that like? _(Gaudy dollwomen loll in the lighted
doorways, in window embrasures, smoking birdseye cigarettes. The
odour of the sicksweet weed floats towards him in slow round ovalling
wreaths.)_

THE WREATHS: Sweet are the sweets. Sweets of sin.

BLOOM: My spine's a bit limp. Go or turn? And this food? Eat it and get
all pigsticky. Absurd I am. Waste of money. One and eightpence too
much. _(The retriever drives a cold snivelling muzzle against his hand,
wagging his tail.)_ Strange how they take to me. Even that brute today.
Better speak to him first. Like women they like _rencontres._ Stinks
like a polecat. _Chacun son gout_. He might be mad. Dogdays. Uncertain
in his movements. Good fellow! Fido! Good fellow! Garryowen! _(The
wolfdog sprawls on his back, wriggling obscenely with begging paws, his
long black tongue lolling out.)_ Influence of his surroundings. Give
and have done with it. Provided nobody. _(Calling encouraging words he
shambles back with a furtive poacher's tread, dogged by the setter into
a dark stalestunk corner. He unrolls one parcel and goes to dump the
crubeen softly but holds back and feels the trotter.)_ Sizeable for
threepence. But then I have it in my left hand. Calls for more effort.
Why? Smaller from want of use. O, let it slide. Two and six.

_(With regret he lets the unrolled crubeen and trotter slide. The
mastiff mauls the bundle clumsily and gluts himself with growling greed,
crunching the bones. Two raincaped watch approach, silent, vigilant.
They murmur together.)_

THE WATCH: Bloom. Of Bloom. For Bloom. Bloom.

_(Each lays hand on Bloom's shoulder.)_

FIRST WATCH: Caught in the act. Commit no nuisance.

BLOOM: _(Stammers)_ I am doing good to others.

_(A covey of gulls, storm petrels, rises hungrily from Liffey slime with
Banbury cakes in their beaks.)_

THE GULLS: Kaw kave kankury kake.

BLOOM: The friend of man. Trained by kindness.

_(He points. Bob Doran, toppling from a high barstool, sways over the
munching spaniel.)_

BOB DORAN: Towser. Give us the paw. Give the paw.

_(The bulldog growls, his scruff standing, a gobbet of pig's knuckle
between his molars through which rabid scumspittle dribbles. Bob Doran
fills silently into an area.)_

SECOND WATCH: Prevention of cruelty to animals.

BLOOM: _(Enthusiastically)_ A noble work! I scolded that tramdriver on
Harold's cross bridge for illusing the poor horse with his harness scab.
Bad French I got for my pains. Of course it was frosty and the last
tram. All tales of circus life are highly demoralising.

_(Signor Maffei, passionpale, in liontamer's costume with diamond studs
in his shirtfront, steps forward, holding a circus paperhoop, a
curling carriagewhip and a revolver with which he covers the gorging
boarhound.)_

SIGNOR MAFFEI: _(With a sinister smile)_ Ladies and gentlemen, my
educated greyhound. It was I broke in the bucking broncho Ajax with my
patent spiked saddle for carnivores. Lash under the belly with a knotted
thong. Block tackle and a strangling pulley will bring your lion to
heel, no matter how fractious, even _Leo ferox_ there, the Libyan
maneater. A redhot crowbar and some liniment rubbing on the burning part
produced Fritz of Amsterdam, the thinking hyena. _(He glares)_ I possess
the Indian sign. The glint of my eye does it with these breastsparklers.
_(With a bewitching smile)_ I now introduce Mademoiselle Ruby, the pride
of the ring.

FIRST WATCH: Come. Name and address.

BLOOM: I have forgotten for the moment. Ah, yes! _(He takes off his high
grade hat, saluting)_ Dr Bloom, Leopold, dental surgeon. You have heard
of von Blum Pasha. Umpteen millions. _Donnerwetter!_ Owns half Austria.
Egypt. Cousin.

FIRST WATCH: Proof.

_(A card falls from inside the leather headband of Bloom's hat.)_

BLOOM: _(In red fez, cadi's dress coat with broad green sash, wearing
a false badge of the Legion of Honour, picks up the card hastily and
offers it)_ Allow me. My club is the Junior Army and Navy. Solicitors:
Messrs John Henry Menton, 27 Bachelor's Walk.

FIRST WATCH: _(Reads)_ Henry Flower. No fixed abode. Unlawfully watching
and besetting.

SECOND WATCH: An alibi. You are cautioned.

BLOOM: _(Produces from his heartpocket a crumpled yellow flower)_ This
is the flower in question. It was given me by a man I don't know his
name. _(Plausibly)_ You know that old joke, rose of Castile. Bloom. The
change of name. Virag. _(He murmurs privately and confidentially)_ We
are engaged you see, sergeant. Lady in the case. Love entanglement. _(He
shoulders the second watch gently)_ Dash it all. It's a way we gallants
have in the navy. Uniform that does it. _(He turns gravely to the first
watch)_ Still, of course, you do get your Waterloo sometimes. Drop in
some evening and have a glass of old Burgundy. _(To the second watch
gaily)_ I'll introduce you, inspector. She's game. Do it in the shake of
a lamb's tail.

_(A dark mercurialised face appears, leading a veiled figure.)_

THE DARK MERCURY: The Castle is looking for him. He was drummed out of
the army.

MARTHA: _(Thickveiled, a crimson halter round her neck, a copy of
the_ Irish Times _in her hand, in tone of reproach, pointing)_ Henry!
Leopold! Lionel, thou lost one! Clear my name.

FIRST WATCH: _(Sternly)_ Come to the station.

BLOOM: _(Scared, hats himself, steps back, then, plucking at his heart
and lifting his right forearm on the square, he gives the sign and
dueguard of fellowcraft)_ No, no, worshipful master, light of love.
Mistaken identity. The Lyons mail. Lesurques and Dubosc. You remember
the Childs fratricide case. We medical men. By striking him dead with
a hatchet. I am wrongfully accused. Better one guilty escape than
ninetynine wrongfully condemned.

MARTHA: _(Sobbing behind her veil)_ Breach of promise. My real name
is Peggy Griffin. He wrote to me that he was miserable. I'll tell my
brother, the Bective rugger fullback, on you, heartless flirt.

BLOOM: _(Behind his hand)_ She's drunk. The woman is inebriated. _(He
murmurs vaguely the pass of Ephraim)_ Shitbroleeth.

SECOND WATCH: _(Tears in his eyes, to Bloom)_ You ought to be thoroughly
well ashamed of yourself.

BLOOM: Gentlemen of the jury, let me explain. A pure mare's nest. I am
a man misunderstood. I am being made a scapegoat of. I am a respectable
married man, without a stain on my character. I live in Eccles street.
My wife, I am the daughter of a most distinguished commander, a gallant
upstanding gentleman, what do you call him, Majorgeneral Brian Tweedy,
one of Britain's fighting men who helped to win our battles. Got his
majority for the heroic defence of Rorke's Drift.

FIRST WATCH: Regiment.

BLOOM: _(Turns to the gallery)_ The royal Dublins, boys, the salt of the
earth, known the world over. I think I see some old comrades in arms
up there among you. The R. D. F., with our own Metropolitan police,
guardians of our homes, the pluckiest lads and the finest body of men,
as physique, in the service of our sovereign.

A VOICE: Turncoat! Up the Boers! Who booed Joe Chamberlain?

BLOOM: _(His hand on the shoulder of the first watch)_ My old dad too
was a J. P. I'm as staunch a Britisher as you are, sir. I fought with
the colours for king and country in the absentminded war under general
Gough in the park and was disabled at Spion Kop and Bloemfontein, was
mentioned in dispatches. I did all a white man could. _(With quiet
feeling)_ Jim Bludso. Hold her nozzle again the bank.

FIRST WATCH: Profession or trade.

BLOOM: Well, I follow a literary occupation, author-journalist. In fact
we are just bringing out a collection of prize stories of which I am the
inventor, something that is an entirely new departure. I am connected
with the British and Irish press. If you ring up...

_(Myles Crawford strides out jerkily, a quill between his teeth. His
scarlet beak blazes within the aureole of his straw hat. He dangles
a hank of Spanish onions in one hand and holds with the other hand a
telephone receiver nozzle to his ear.)_

MYLES CRAWFORD: _(His cock's wattles wagging)_ Hello, seventyseven
eightfour. Hello. _Freeman's Urinal_ and _Weekly Arsewipe_ here.
Paralyse Europe. You which? Bluebags? Who writes? Is it Bloom?

_(Mr Philip Beaufoy, palefaced, stands in the witnessbox, in accurate
morning dress, outbreast pocket with peak of handkerchief showing,
creased lavender trousers and patent boots. He carries a large portfolio
labelled_ Matcham's Masterstrokes.)

BEAUFOY: _(Drawls)_ No, you aren't. Not by a long shot if I know it.
I don't see it that's all. No born gentleman, no-one with the most
rudimentary promptings of a gentleman would stoop to such particularly
loathsome conduct. One of those, my lord. A plagiarist. A soapy sneak
masquerading as a litterateur. It's perfectly obvious that with the most
inherent baseness he has cribbed some of my bestselling copy, really
gorgeous stuff, a perfect gem, the love passages in which are beneath
suspicion. The Beaufoy books of love and great possessions, with which
your lordship is doubtless familiar, are a household word throughout the
kingdom.

BLOOM: _(Murmurs with hangdog meekness glum)_ That bit about the
laughing witch hand in hand I take exception to, if I may...

BEAUFOY: _(His lip upcurled, smiles superciliously on the court)_ You
funny ass, you! You're too beastly awfully weird for words! I don't
think you need over excessively disincommodate yourself in that regard.
My literary agent Mr J. B. Pinker is in attendance. I presume, my
lord, we shall receive the usual witnesses' fees, shan't we? We are
considerably out of pocket over this bally pressman johnny, this jackdaw
of Rheims, who has not even been to a university.

BLOOM: _(Indistinctly)_ University of life. Bad art.

BEAUFOY: _(Shouts)_ It's a damnably foul lie, showing the moral
rottenness of the man! _(He extends his portfolio)_ We have here damning
evidence, the _corpus delicti_, my lord, a specimen of my maturer work
disfigured by the hallmark of the beast.

A VOICE FROM THE GALLERY:

Moses, Moses, king of the jews, Wiped his arse in the Daily News.

BLOOM: _(Bravely)_ Overdrawn.

BEAUFOY: You low cad! You ought to be ducked in the horsepond, you
rotter! _(To the court)_ Why, look at the man's private life! Leading
a quadruple existence! Street angel and house devil. Not fit to be
mentioned in mixed society! The archconspirator of the age!

BLOOM: _(To the court)_ And he, a bachelor, how...

FIRST WATCH: The King versus Bloom. Call the woman Driscoll.

THE CRIER: Mary Driscoll, scullerymaid!

_(Mary Driscoll, a slipshod servant girl, approaches. She has a bucket
on the crook of her arm and a scouringbrush in her hand.)_

SECOND WATCH: Another! Are you of the unfortunate class?

MARY DRISCOLL: _(Indignantly)_ I'm not a bad one. I bear a respectable
character and was four months in my last place. I was in a situation,
six pounds a year and my chances with Fridays out and I had to leave
owing to his carryings on.

FIRST WATCH: What do you tax him with?

MARY DRISCOLL: He made a certain suggestion but I thought more of myself
as poor as I am.

BLOOM: _(In housejacket of ripplecloth, flannel trousers, heelless
slippers, unshaven, his hair rumpled: softly)_ I treated you white.
I gave you mementos, smart emerald garters far above your station.
Incautiously I took your part when you were accused of pilfering.
There's a medium in all things. Play cricket.

MARY DRISCOLL: _(Excitedly)_ As God is looking down on me this night if
ever I laid a hand to them oysters!

FIRST WATCH: The offence complained of? Did something happen?

MARY DRISCOLL: He surprised me in the rere of the premises, Your honour,
when the missus was out shopping one morning with a request for a safety
pin. He held me and I was discoloured in four places as a result. And he
interfered twict with my clothing.

BLOOM: She counterassaulted.

MARY DRISCOLL: _(Scornfully)_ I had more respect for the scouringbrush,
so I had. I remonstrated with him, Your lord, and he remarked: keep it
quiet.

_(General laughter.)_

GEORGE FOTTRELL: _(Clerk of the crown and peace, resonantly)_ Order in
court! The accused will now make a bogus statement.

_(Bloom, pleading not guilty and holding a fullblown waterlily, begins
a long unintelligible speech. They would hear what counsel had to say in
his stirring address to the grand jury. He was down and out but, though
branded as a black sheep, if he might say so, he meant to reform, to
retrieve the memory of the past in a purely sisterly way and return to
nature as a purely domestic animal. A sevenmonths' child, he had been
carefully brought up and nurtured by an aged bedridden parent. There
might have been lapses of an erring father but he wanted to turn over
a new leaf and now, when at long last in sight of the whipping post,
to lead a homely life in the evening of his days, permeated by the
affectionate surroundings of the heaving bosom of the family. An
acclimatised Britisher, he had seen that summer eve from the footplate
of an engine cab of the Loop line railway company while the rain
refrained from falling glimpses, as it were, through the windows of
loveful households in Dublin city and urban district of scenes truly
rural of happiness of the better land with Dockrell's wallpaper at one
and ninepence a dozen, innocent Britishborn bairns lisping prayers to
the Sacred Infant, youthful scholars grappling with their pensums or
model young ladies playing on the pianoforte or anon all with fervour
reciting the family rosary round the crackling Yulelog while in the
boreens and green lanes the colleens with their swains strolled what
times the strains of the organtoned melodeon Britannia metalbound with
four acting stops and twelvefold bellows, a sacrifice, greatest bargain
ever..._

_(Renewed laughter. He mumbles incoherently. Reporters complain that
they cannot hear.)_

LONGHAND AND SHORTHAND: _(Without looking up from their notebooks)_
Loosen his boots.

PROFESSOR MACHUGH: _(From the presstable, coughs and calls)_ Cough it
up, man. Get it out in bits.

_(The crossexamination proceeds re Bloom and the bucket. A large bucket.
Bloom himself. Bowel trouble. In Beaver street Gripe, yes. Quite bad.
A plasterer's bucket. By walking stifflegged. Suffered untold misery.
Deadly agony. About noon. Love or burgundy. Yes, some spinach. Crucial
moment. He did not look in the bucket Nobody. Rather a mess. Not
completely._ A Titbits _back number_.)

_(Uproar and catcalls. Bloom in a torn frockcoat stained with whitewash,
dinged silk hat sideways on his head, a strip of stickingplaster across
his nose, talks inaudibly.)_

J. J. O'MOLLOY: _(In barrister's grey wig and stuffgown, speaking with
a voice of pained protest)_ This is no place for indecent levity at
the expense of an erring mortal disguised in liquor. We are not in a
beargarden nor at an Oxford rag nor is this a travesty of justice. My
client is an infant, a poor foreign immigrant who started scratch as
a stowaway and is now trying to turn an honest penny. The trumped up
misdemeanour was due to a momentary aberration of heredity, brought on
by hallucination, such familiarities as the alleged guilty occurrence
being quite permitted in my client's native place, the land of the
Pharaoh. _Prima facie_, I put it to you that there was no attempt at
carnally knowing. Intimacy did not occur and the offence complained of
by Driscoll, that her virtue was solicited, was not repeated. I would
deal in especial with atavism. There have been cases of shipwreck and
somnambulism in my client's family. If the accused could speak he could
a tale unfold--one of the strangest that have ever been narrated between
the covers of a book. He himself, my lord, is a physical wreck from
cobbler's weak chest. His submission is that he is of Mongolian
extraction and irresponsible for his actions. Not all there, in fact.

BLOOM: _(Barefoot, pigeonbreasted, in lascar's vest and trousers,
apologetic toes turned in, opens his tiny mole's eyes and looks about
him dazedly, passing a slow hand across his forehead. Then he hitches
his belt sailor fashion and with a shrug of oriental obeisance salutes
the court, pointing one thumb heavenward.)_ Him makee velly muchee fine
night. _(He begins to lilt simply)_

     Li li poo lil chile
     Blingee pigfoot evly night
     Payee two shilly...

_(He is howled down.)_

J. J. O'MOLLOY: _(Hotly to the populace)_ This is a lonehand fight. By
Hades, I will not have any client of mine gagged and badgered in this
fashion by a pack of curs and laughing hyenas. The Mosaic code has
superseded the law of the jungle. I say it and I say it emphatically,
without wishing for one moment to defeat the ends of justice, accused
was not accessory before the act and prosecutrix has not been tampered
with. The young person was treated by defendant as if she were his very
own daughter. _(Bloom takes J. J. O'Molloy's hand and raises it to his
lips.)_ I shall call rebutting evidence to prove up to the hilt that the
hidden hand is again at its old game. When in doubt persecute Bloom. My
client, an innately bashful man, would be the last man in the world to
do anything ungentlemanly which injured modesty could object to or
cast a stone at a girl who took the wrong turning when some dastard,
responsible for her condition, had worked his own sweet will on her. He
wants to go straight. I regard him as the whitest man I know. He is down
on his luck at present owing to the mortgaging of his extensive property
at Agendath Netaim in faraway Asia Minor, slides of which will now be
shown. _(To Bloom)_ I suggest that you will do the handsome thing.

BLOOM: A penny in the pound.

_(The image of the lake of Kinnereth with blurred cattle cropping in
silver haze is projected on the wall. Moses Dlugacz, ferreteyed albino,
in blue dungarees, stands up in the gallery, holding in each hand an
orange citron and a pork kidney.)_

DLUGACZ: _(Hoarsely)_ Bleibtreustrasse, Berlin, W.13.

_(J. J. O'Molloy steps on to a low plinth and holds the lapel of his
coat with solemnity. His face lengthens, grows pale and bearded, with
sunken eyes, the blotches of phthisis and hectic cheekbones of John F.
Taylor. He applies his handkerchief to his mouth and scrutinises the
galloping tide of rosepink blood.)_

J.J.O'MOLLOY: _(Almost voicelessly)_ Excuse me. I am suffering from a
severe chill, have recently come from a sickbed. A few wellchosen words.
_(He assumes the avine head, foxy moustache and proboscidal eloquence of
Seymour Bushe.)_ When the angel's book comes to be opened if aught
that the pensive bosom has inaugurated of soultransfigured and of
soultransfiguring deserves to live I say accord the prisoner at the bar
the sacred benefit of the doubt. _(A paper with something written on it
is handed into court._)

BLOOM: _(In court dress)_ Can give best references. Messrs Callan,
Coleman. Mr Wisdom Hely J. P. My old chief Joe Cuffe. Mr V. B. Dillon,
ex lord mayor of Dublin. I have moved in the charmed circle of the
highest... Queens of Dublin society. _(Carelessly)_ I was just chatting
this afternoon at the viceregal lodge to my old pals, sir Robert and
lady Ball, astronomer royal at the levee. Sir Bob, I said...

MRS YELVERTON BARRY: _(In lowcorsaged opal balldress and elbowlength
ivory gloves, wearing a sabletrimmed brickquilted dolman, a comb of
brilliants and panache of osprey in her hair)_ Arrest him, constable. He
wrote me an anonymous letter in prentice backhand when my husband was
in the North Riding of Tipperary on the Munster circuit, signed James
Lovebirch. He said that he had seen from the gods my peerless globes as
I sat in a box of the _Theatre Royal_ at a command performance of _La
Cigale_. I deeply inflamed him, he said. He made improper overtures
to me to misconduct myself at half past four p.m. on the following
Thursday, Dunsink time. He offered to send me through the post a work
of fiction by Monsieur Paul de Kock, entitled _The Girl with the Three
Pairs of Stays_.

MRS BELLINGHAM: _(In cap and seal coney mantle, wrapped up to the
nose, steps out of her brougham and scans through tortoiseshell
quizzing-glasses which she takes from inside her huge opossum muff)_
Also to me. Yes, I believe it is the same objectionable person. Because
he closed my carriage door outside sir Thornley Stoker's one sleety day
during the cold snap of February ninetythree when even the grid of the
wastepipe and the ballstop in my bath cistern were frozen. Subsequently
he enclosed a bloom of edelweiss culled on the heights, as he said,
in my honour. I had it examined by a botanical expert and elicited the
information that it was ablossom of the homegrown potato plant purloined
from a forcingcase of the model farm.

MRS YELVERTON BARRY: Shame on him!

_(A crowd of sluts and ragamuffins surges forward)_

THE SLUTS AND RAGAMUFFINS: _(Screaming)_ Stop thief! Hurrah there,
Bluebeard! Three cheers for Ikey Mo!

SECOND WATCH: _(Produces handcuffs)_ Here are the darbies.

MRS BELLINGHAM: He addressed me in several handwritings with fulsome
compliments as a Venus in furs and alleged profound pity for my
frostbound coachman Palmer while in the same breath he expressed himself
as envious of his earflaps and fleecy sheepskins and of his fortunate
proximity to my person, when standing behind my chair wearing my livery
and the armorial bearings of the Bellingham escutcheon garnished sable,
a buck's head couped or. He lauded almost extravagantly my nether
extremities, my swelling calves in silk hose drawn up to the limit, and
eulogised glowingly my other hidden treasures in priceless lace which,
he said, he could conjure up. He urged me (stating that he felt it
his mission in life to urge me) to defile the marriage bed, to commit
adultery at the earliest possible opportunity.

THE HONOURABLE MRS MERVYN TALBOYS: _(In amazon costume, hard hat,
jackboots cockspurred, vermilion waistcoat, fawn musketeer gauntlets
with braided drums, long train held up and hunting crop with which she
strikes her welt constantly)_ Also me. Because he saw me on the polo
ground of the Phoenix park at the match All Ireland versus the Rest of
Ireland. My eyes, I know, shone divinely as I watched Captain Slogger
Dennehy of the Inniskillings win the final chukkar on his darling cob
_Centaur._ This plebeian Don Juan observed me from behind a hackney car
and sent me in double envelopes an obscene photograph, such as are sold
after dark on Paris boulevards, insulting to any lady. I have it still.
It represents a partially nude seÃ±orita, frail and lovely (his wife, as
he solemnly assured me, taken by him from nature), practising illicit
intercourse with a muscular torero, evidently a blackguard. He urged me
to do likewise, to misbehave, to sin with officers of the garrison. He
implored me to soil his letter in an unspeakable manner, to chastise
him as he richly deserves, to bestride and ride him, to give him a most
vicious horsewhipping.

MRS BELLINGHAM: Me too.

MRS YELVERTON BARRY: Me too.

_(Several highly respectable Dublin ladies hold up improper letters
received from Bloom.)_

THE HONOURABLE MRS MERVYN TALBOYS: _(Stamps her jingling spurs in a
sudden paroxysm of fury)_ I will, by the God above me. I'll scourge the
pigeonlivered cur as long as I can stand over him. I'll flay him alive.

BLOOM: _(His eyes closing, quails expectantly)_ Here? _(He squirms)_
Again! _(He pants cringing)_ I love the danger.

THE HONOURABLE MRS MERVYN TALBOYS: Very much so! I'll make it hot for
you. I'll make you dance Jack Latten for that.

MRS BELLINGHAM: Tan his breech well, the upstart! Write the stars and
stripes on it!

MRS YELVERTON BARRY: Disgraceful! There's no excuse for him! A married
man!

BLOOM: All these people. I meant only the spanking idea. A warm tingling
glow without effusion. Refined birching to stimulate the circulation.

THE HONOURABLE MRS MERVYN TALBOYS: _(Laughs derisively)_ O, did you, my
fine fellow? Well, by the living God, you'll get the surprise of your
life now, believe me, the most unmerciful hiding a man ever bargained
for. You have lashed the dormant tigress in my nature into fury.

MRS BELLINGHAM: _(Shakes her muff and quizzing-glasses vindictively)_
Make him smart, Hanna dear. Give him ginger. Thrash the mongrel within
an inch of his life. The cat-o'-nine-tails. Geld him. Vivisect him.

BLOOM: _(Shuddering, shrinking, joins his hands: with hangdog mien)_ O
cold! O shivery! It was your ambrosial beauty. Forget, forgive. Kismet.
Let me off this once. _(He offers the other cheek)_

MRS YELVERTON BARRY: _(Severely)_ Don't do so on any account, Mrs
Talboys! He should be soundly trounced!

THE HONOURABLE MRS MERVYN TALBOYS: _(Unbuttoning her gauntlet
violently)_ I'll do no such thing. Pigdog and always was ever since
he was pupped! To dare address me! I'll flog him black and blue in
the public streets. I'll dig my spurs in him up to the rowel. He is a
wellknown cuckold. _(She swishes her huntingcrop savagely in the air)_
Take down his trousers without loss of time. Come here, sir! Quick!
Ready?

BLOOM: _(Trembling, beginning to obey)_ The weather has been so warm.

_(Davy Stephens, ringletted, passes with a bevy of barefoot newsboys.)_

DAVY STEPHENS: _Messenger of the Sacred Heart and Evening Telegraph_
with Saint Patrick's Day supplement. Containing the new addresses of all
the cuckolds in Dublin.

_(The very reverend Canon O'Hanlon in cloth of gold cope elevates and
exposes a marble timepiece. Before him Father Conroy and the reverend
John Hughes S.J. bend low.)_

THE TIMEPIECE: _(Unportalling)_

     Cuckoo.
     Cuckoo.
     Cuckoo.

_(The brass quoits of a bed are heard to jingle.)_

THE QUOITS: Jigjag. Jigajiga. Jigjag.

_(A panel of fog rolls back rapidly, revealing rapidly in the jurybox
the faces of Martin Cunningham, foreman, silkhatted, Jack Power, Simon
Dedalus, Tom Kernan, Ned Lambert, John Henry Menton Myles Crawford,
Lenehan, Paddy Leonard, Nosey Flynn, M'Coy and the featureless face of a
Nameless One.)_

THE NAMELESS ONE: Bareback riding. Weight for age. Gob, he organised
her.

THE JURORS: _(All their heads turned to his voice)_ Really?

THE NAMELESS ONE: _(Snarls)_ Arse over tip. Hundred shillings to five.

THE JURORS: _(All their heads lowered in assent)_ Most of us thought as
much.

FIRST WATCH: He is a marked man. Another girl's plait cut. Wanted: Jack
the Ripper. A thousand pounds reward.

SECOND WATCH: _(Awed, whispers)_ And in black. A mormon. Anarchist.

THE CRIER: _(Loudly)_ Whereas Leopold Bloom of no fixed abode is a
wellknown dynamitard, forger, bigamist, bawd and cuckold and a public
nuisance to the citizens of Dublin and whereas at this commission of
assizes the most honourable...

_(His Honour, sir Frederick Falkiner, recorder of Dublin, in judicial
garb of grey stone rises from the bench, stonebearded. He bears in his
arms an umbrella sceptre. From his forehead arise starkly the Mosaic
ramshorns.)_

THE RECORDER: I will put an end to this white slave traffic and rid
Dublin of this odious pest. Scandalous! _(He dons the black cap)_ Let
him be taken, Mr Subsheriff, from the dock where he now stands and
detained in custody in Mountjoy prison during His Majesty's pleasure
and there be hanged by the neck until he is dead and therein fail not
at your peril or may the Lord have mercy on your soul. Remove him. _(A
black skullcap descends upon his head.)_

_(The subsheriff Long John Fanning appears, smoking a pungent Henry
Clay.)_

LONG JOHN FANNING: _(Scowls and calls with rich rolling utterance)_
Who'll hang Judas Iscariot?

_(H. Rumbold, master barber, in a bloodcoloured jerkin and tanner's
apron, a rope coiled over his shoulder, mounts the block. A life
preserver and a nailstudded bludgeon are stuck in his belt. He rubs
grimly his grappling hands, knobbed with knuckledusters.)_

RUMBOLD: _(To the recorder with sinister familiarity)_ Hanging Harry,
your Majesty, the Mersey terror. Five guineas a jugular. Neck or
nothing.

_(The bells of George's church toll slowly, loud dark iron.)_

THE BELLS: Heigho! Heigho!

BLOOM: _(Desperately)_ Wait. Stop. Gulls. Good heart. I saw. Innocence.
Girl in the monkeyhouse. Zoo. Lewd chimpanzee. _(Breathlessly)_ Pelvic
basin. Her artless blush unmanned me. _(Overcome with emotion)_ I left
the precincts. (He turns to a figure in the crowd, appealing) Hynes, may
I speak to you? You know me. That three shillings you can keep. If you
want a little more...

<<<<<<< Updated upstream

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license
=======
HYNES: _(Coldly)_ You are a perfect stranger.

SECOND WATCH: _(Points to the corner)_ The bomb is here.
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

FIRST WATCH: Infernal machine with a time fuse.

BLOOM: No, no. Pig's feet. I was at a funeral.

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
Title: The Iliad of Homer

Author: Homer

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #6130]
=======
FIRST WATCH: _(Draws his truncheon)_ Liar!

_(The beagle lifts his snout, showing the grey scorbutic face of Paddy
Dignam. He has gnawed all. He exhales a putrid carcasefed breath.
He grows to human size and shape. His dachshund coat becomes a brown
mortuary habit. His green eye flashes bloodshot. Half of one ear, all
the nose and both thumbs are ghouleaten.)_

PADDY DIGNAM: _(In a hollow voice)_ It is true. It was my funeral.
Doctor Finucane pronounced life extinct when I succumbed to the disease
from natural causes.

_(He lifts his mutilated ashen face moonwards and bays lugubriously.)_

BLOOM: _(In triumph)_ You hear?

PADDY DIGNAM: Bloom, I am Paddy Dignam's spirit. List, list, O list!

BLOOM: The voice is the voice of Esau.
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

SECOND WATCH: _(Blesses himself)_ How is that possible?

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
Character set encoding: ISO 8859-1
=======
FIRST WATCH: It is not in the penny catechism.

PADDY DIGNAM: By metempsychosis. Spooks.

A VOICE: O rocks.

PADDY DIGNAM: _(Earnestly)_ Once I was in the employ of Mr J. H. Menton,
solicitor, commissioner for oaths and affidavits, of 27 Bachelor's Walk.
Now I am defunct, the wall of the heart hypertrophied. Hard lines. The
poor wife was awfully cut up. How is she bearing it? Keep her off that
bottle of sherry. _(He looks round him)_ A lamp. I must satisfy an
animal need. That buttermilk didn't agree with me.

_(The portly figure of John O'Connell, caretaker, stands forth, holding
a bunch of keys tied with crape. Beside him stands Father Coffey,
chaplain, toadbellied, wrynecked, in a surplice and bandanna nightcap,
holding sleepily a staff twisted poppies.)_

FATHER COFFEY: _(Yawns, then chants with a hoarse croak)_ Namine.
Jacobs. Vobiscuits. Amen.

JOHN O'CONNELL: _(Foghorns stormily through his megaphone)_ Dignam,
Patrick T, deceased.

PADDY DIGNAM: _(With pricked up ears, winces)_ Overtones. _(He wriggles
forward and places an ear to the ground)_ My master's voice!

JOHN O'CONNELL: Burial docket letter number U. P. eightyfive thousand.
Field seventeen. House of Keys. Plot, one hundred and one.

_(Paddy Dignam listens with visible effort, thinking, his tail
stiffpointcd, his ears cocked.)_

PADDY DIGNAM: Pray for the repose of his soul.

_(He worms down through a coalhole, his brown habit trailing its tether
over rattling pebbles. After him toddles an obese grandfather rat on
fungus turtle paws under a grey carapace. Dignam's voice, muffled, is
heard baying under ground:_ Dignam's dead and gone below. _Tom Rochford,
robinredbreasted, in cap and breeches, jumps from his twocolumned
machine.)_

TOM ROCHFORD: _(A hand to his breastbone, bows)_ Reuben J. A florin I
find him. _(He fixes the manhole with a resolute stare)_ My turn now on.
Follow me up to Carlow.

_(He executes a daredevil salmon leap in the air and is engulfed in the
coalhole. Two discs on the columns wobble, eyes of nought. All recedes.
Bloom plodges forward again through the sump. Kisses chirp amid
the rifts of fog a piano sounds. He stands before a lighted house,
listening. The kisses, winging from their bowers fly about him,
twittering, warbling, cooing.)_

THE KISSES: _(Warbling)_ Leo! _(Twittering)_ Icky licky micky sticky for
Leo! _(Cooing)_ Coo coocoo! Yummyyum, Womwom! _(Warbling)_ Big comebig!
Pirouette! Leopopold! _(Twittering)_ Leeolee! _(Warbling)_ O Leo!

_(They rustle, flutter upon his garments, alight, bright giddy flecks,
silvery sequins.)_

BLOOM: A man's touch. Sad music. Church music. Perhaps here.

_(Zoe Higgins, a young whore in a sapphire slip, closed with three
bronze buckles, a slim black velvet fillet round her throat, nods, trips
down the steps and accosts him.)_

ZOE: Are you looking for someone? He's inside with his friend.

BLOOM: Is this Mrs Mack's?

ZOE: No, eightyone. Mrs Cohen's. You might go farther and fare worse.
Mother Slipperslapper. _(Familiarly)_ She's on the job herself tonight
with the vet her tipster that gives her all the winners and pays for
her son in Oxford. Working overtime but her luck's turned today.
_(Suspiciously)_ You're not his father, are you?

BLOOM: Not I!

ZOE: You both in black. Has little mousey any tickles tonight?

_(His skin, alert, feels her fingertips approach. A hand glides over his
left thigh.)_

ZOE: How's the nuts?

BLOOM: Off side. Curiously they are on the right. Heavier, I suppose.
One in a million my tailor, Mesias, says.

ZOE: _(In sudden alarm)_ You've a hard chancre.

BLOOM: Not likely.

ZOE: I feel it.

_(Her hand slides into his left trouser pocket and brings out a hard
black shrivelled potato. She regards it and Bloom with dumb moist
lips.)_

BLOOM: A talisman. Heirloom.

ZOE: For Zoe? For keeps? For being so nice, eh?

_(She puts the potato greedily into a pocket then links his arm,
cuddling him with supple warmth. He smiles uneasily. Slowly, note by
note, oriental music is played. He gazes in the tawny crystal of her
eyes, ringed with kohol. His smile softens.)_

ZOE: You'll know me the next time.

BLOOM: _(Forlornly)_ I never loved a dear gazelle but it was sure to...

_(Gazelles are leaping, feeding on the mountains. Near are lakes. Round
their shores file shadows black of cedargroves. Aroma rises, a strong
hairgrowth of resin. It burns, the orient, a sky of sapphire, cleft by
the bronze flight of eagles. Under it lies the womancity nude, white,
still, cool, in luxury. A fountain murmurs among damask roses. Mammoth
roses murmur of scarlet winegrapes. A wine of shame, lust, blood exudes,
strangely murmuring.)_

ZOE: _(Murmuring singsong with the music, her odalisk lips lusciously
smeared with salve of swinefat and rosewater) Schorach ani wenowach,
benoith Hierushaloim._

BLOOM: _(Fascinated)_ I thought you were of good stock by your accent.

ZOE: And you know what thought did?

_(She bites his ear gently with little goldstopped teeth, sending on
him a cloying breath of stale garlic. The roses draw apart, disclose a
sepulchre of the gold of kings and their mouldering bones.)_

BLOOM: _(Draws back, mechanically caressing her right bub with a flat
awkward hand)_ Are you a Dublin girl?

ZOE: _(Catches a stray hair deftly and twists it to her coil)_ No bloody
fear. I'm English. Have you a swaggerroot?

BLOOM: _(As before)_ Rarely smoke, dear. Cigar now and then. Childish
device. _(Lewdly)_ The mouth can be better engaged than with a cylinder
of rank weed.

ZOE: Go on. Make a stump speech out of it.

BLOOM: _(In workman's corduroy overalls, black gansy with red floating
tie and apache cap)_ Mankind is incorrigible. Sir Walter Ralegh brought
from the new world that potato and that weed, the one a killer of
pestilence by absorption, the other a poisoner of the ear, eye, heart,
memory, will understanding, all. That is to say he brought the poison
a hundred years before another person whose name I forget brought the
food. Suicide. Lies. All our habits. Why, look at our public life!

_(Midnight chimes from distant steeples.)_

THE CHIMES: Turn again, Leopold! Lord mayor of Dublin!

BLOOM: _(In alderman's gown and chain)_ Electors of Arran Quay, Inns
Quay, Rotunda, Mountjoy and North Dock, better run a tramline, I say,
from the cattlemarket to the river. That's the music of the future.
That's my programme. _Cui bono_? But our bucaneering Vanderdeckens in
their phantom ship of finance...

AN ELECTOR: Three times three for our future chief magistrate!

_(The aurora borealis of the torchlight procession leaps.)_

THE TORCHBEARERS: Hooray!

_(Several wellknown burgesses, city magnates and freemen of the city
shake hands with Bloom and congratulate him. Timothy Harrington, late
thrice Lord Mayor of Dublin, imposing in mayoral scarlet, gold chain and
white silk tie, confers with councillor Lorcan Sherlock, locum tenens.
They nod vigorously in agreement.)_

LATE LORD MAYOR HARRINGTON: _(In scarlet robe with mace, gold mayoral
chain and large white silk scarf)_ That alderman sir Leo Bloom's speech
be printed at the expense of the ratepayers. That the house in which
he was born be ornamented with a commemorative tablet and that the
thoroughfare hitherto known as Cow Parlour off Cork street be henceforth
designated Boulevard Bloom.

COUNCILLOR LORCAN SHERLOCK: Carried unanimously.

BLOOM: _(Impassionedly)_ These flying Dutchmen or lying Dutchmen as
they recline in their upholstered poop, casting dice, what reck they?
Machines is their cry, their chimera, their panacea. Laboursaving
apparatuses, supplanters, bugbears, manufactured monsters for mutual
murder, hideous hobgoblins produced by a horde of capitalistic lusts
upon our prostituted labour. The poor man starves while they are
grassing their royal mountain stags or shooting peasants and phartridges
in their purblind pomp of pelf and power. But their reign is rover for
rever and ever and ev...

_(Prolonged applause. Venetian masts, maypoles and festal arches spring
up. A streamer bearing the legends_ Cead Mile Failte _and_ Mah Ttob
Melek Israel _Spans the street. All the windows are thronged with
sightseers, chiefly ladies. Along the route the regiments of the
royal Dublin Fusiliers, the King's own Scottish Borderers, the Cameron
Highlanders and the Welsh Fusiliers standing to attention, keep back
the crowd. Boys from High school are perched on the lampposts,
telegraph poles, windowsills, cornices, gutters, chimneypots, railings,
rainspouts, whistling and cheering the pillar of the cloud appears. A
fife and drum band is heard in the distance playing the Kol Nidre. The
beaters approach with imperial eagles hoisted, trailing banners and
waving oriental palms. The chryselephantine papal standard rises high,
surrounded by pennons of the civic flag. The van of the procession
appears headed by John Howard Parnell, city marshal, in a chessboard
tabard, the Athlone Poursuivant and Ulster King of Arms. They are
followed by the Right Honourable Joseph Hutchinson, lord mayor of
Dublin, his lordship the lord mayor of Cork, their worships the
mayors of Limerick, Galway, Sligo and Waterford, twentyeight Irish
representative peers, sirdars, grandees and maharajahs bearing the cloth
of estate, the Dublin Metropolitan Fire Brigade, the chapter of the
saints of finance in their plutocratic order of precedence, the bishop
of Down and Connor, His Eminence Michael cardinal Logue, archbishop of
Armagh, primate of all Ireland, His Grace, the most reverend Dr William
Alexander, archbishop of Armagh, primate of all Ireland, the chief
rabbi, the presbyterian moderator, the heads of the baptist, anabaptist,
methodist and Moravian chapels and the honorary secretary of the society
of friends. After them march the guilds and trades and trainbands
with flying colours: coopers, bird fanciers, millwrights, newspaper
canvassers, law scriveners, masseurs, vintners, trussmakers,
chimneysweeps, lard refiners, tabinet and poplin weavers, farriers,
Italian warehousemen, church decorators, bootjack manufacturers,
undertakers, silk mercers, lapidaries, salesmasters, corkcutters,
assessors of fire losses, dyers and cleaners, export bottlers,
fellmongers, ticketwriters, heraldic seal engravers, horse repository
hands, bullion brokers, cricket and archery outfitters, riddlemakers,
egg and potato factors, hosiers and glovers, plumbing contractors. After
them march gentlemen of the bedchamber, Black Rod, Deputy Garter,
Gold Stick, the master of horse, the lord great chamberlain, the earl
marshal, the high constable carrying the sword of state, saint Stephen's
iron crown, the chalice and bible. Four buglers on foot blow a sennet.
Beefeaters reply, winding clarions of welcome. Under an arch of triumph
Bloom appears, bareheaded, in a crimson velvet mantle trimmed with
ermine, bearing Saint Edward's staff the orb and sceptre with the dove,
the curtana. He is seated on a milkwhite horse with long flowing crimson
tail, richly caparisoned, with golden headstall. Wild excitement. The
ladies from their balconies throw down rosepetals. The air is perfumed
with essences. The men cheer. Bloom's boys run amid the bystanders with
branches of hawthorn and wrenbushes.)_

BLOOM'S BOYS:

     The wren, the wren,
     The king of all birds,
     Saint Stephen's his day
     Was caught in the furze.


A BLACKSMITH: _(Murmurs)_ For the honour of God! And is that Bloom? He
scarcely looks thirtyone.

A PAVIOR AND FLAGGER: That's the famous Bloom now, the world's greatest
reformer. Hats off!

_(All uncover their heads. Women whisper eagerly.)_

A MILLIONAIRESS: _(Richly)_ Isn't he simply wonderful?

A NOBLEWOMAN: _(Nobly)_ All that man has seen!

A FEMINIST: _(Masculinely)_ And done!

A BELLHANGER: A classic face! He has the forehead of a thinker.

_(Bloom's weather. A sunburst appears in the northwest.)_

THE BISHOP OF DOWN AND CONNOR: I here present your undoubted
emperor-president and king-chairman, the most serene and potent and very
puissant ruler of this realm. God save Leopold the First!

ALL: God save Leopold the First!

BLOOM: _(In dalmatic and purple mantle, to the bishop of Down and
Connor, with dignity)_ Thanks, somewhat eminent sir.

WILLIAM, ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH: _(In purple stock and shovel hat)_
Will you to your power cause law and mercy to be executed in all your
judgments in Ireland and territories thereunto belonging?

BLOOM: _(Placing his right hand on his testicles, swears)_ So may the
Creator deal with me. All this I promise to do.

MICHAEL, ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH: _(Pours a cruse of hairoil over Bloom's
head) Gaudium magnum annuntio vobis. Habemus carneficem._ Leopold,
Patrick, Andrew, David, George, be thou anointed!

_(Bloom assumes a mantle of cloth of gold and puts on a ruby ring. He
ascends and stands on the stone of destiny. The representative peers put
on at the same time their twentyeight crowns. Joybells ring in Christ
church, Saint Patrick's, George's and gay Malahide. Mirus bazaar
fireworks go up from all sides with symbolical phallopyrotechnic
designs. The peers do homage, one by one, approaching and
genuflecting.)_

THE PEERS: I do become your liege man of life and limb to earthly
worship.

_(Bloom holds up his right hand on which sparkles the Koh-i-Noor
diamond. His palfrey neighs. Immediate silence. Wireless
intercontinental and interplanetary transmitters are set for reception
of message.)_

BLOOM: My subjects! We hereby nominate our faithful charger Copula Felix
hereditary Grand Vizier and announce that we have this day repudiated
our former spouse and have bestowed our royal hand upon the princess
Selene, the splendour of night.

_(The former morganatic spouse of Bloom is hastily removed in the Black
Maria. The princess Selene, in moonblue robes, a silver crescent on her
head, descends from a Sedan chair, borne by two giants. An outburst of
cheering.)_

JOHN HOWARD PARNELL: _(Raises the royal standard)_ Illustrious Bloom!
Successor to my famous brother!

BLOOM: _(Embraces John Howard Parnell)_ We thank you from our heart,
John, for this right royal welcome to green Erin, the promised land of
our common ancestors.

_(The freedom of the city is presented to him embodied in a charter. The
keys of Dublin, crossed on a crimson cushion, are given to him. He shows
all that he is wearing green socks.)_

TOM KERNAN: You deserve it, your honour.

BLOOM: On this day twenty years ago we overcame the hereditary enemy at
Ladysmith. Our howitzers and camel swivel guns played on his lines with
telling effect. Half a league onward! They charge! All is lost now! Do
we yield? No! We drive them headlong! Lo! We charge! Deploying to the
left our light horse swept across the heights of Plevna and, uttering
their warcry _Bonafide Sabaoth_, sabred the Saracen gunners to a man.

THE CHAPEL OF FREEMAN TYPESETTERS: Hear! Hear!

JOHN WYSE NOLAN: There's the man that got away James Stephens.

A BLUECOAT SCHOOLBOY: Bravo!

AN OLD RESIDENT: You're a credit to your country, sir, that's what you
are.

AN APPLEWOMAN: He's a man like Ireland wants.

BLOOM: My beloved subjects, a new era is about to dawn. I, Bloom, tell
you verily it is even now at hand. Yea, on the word of a Bloom, ye shall
ere long enter into the golden city which is to be, the new Bloomusalem
in the Nova Hibernia of the future.

_(Thirtytwo workmen, wearing rosettes, from all the counties of Ireland,
under the guidance of Derwan the builder, construct the new Bloomusalem.
It is a colossal edifice with crystal roof, built in the shape of a
huge pork kidney, containing forty thousand rooms. In the course of its
extension several buildings and monuments are demolished. Government
offices are temporarily transferred to railway sheds. Numerous houses
are razed to the ground. The inhabitants are lodged in barrels and
boxes, all marked in red with the letters: L. B. several paupers
fill from a ladder. A part of the walls of Dublin, crowded with loyal
sightseers, collapses.)_

THE SIGHTSEERS: _(Dying) Morituri te salutant. (They die)_

_(A man in a brown macintosh springs up through a trapdoor. He points an
elongated finger at Bloom.)_

THE MAN IN THE MACINTOSH: Don't you believe a word he says. That man is
Leopold M'Intosh, the notorious fireraiser. His real name is Higgins.

BLOOM: Shoot him! Dog of a christian! So much for M'Intosh!

_(A cannonshot. The man in the macintosh disappears. Bloom with his
sceptre strikes down poppies. The instantaneous deaths of many
powerful enemies, graziers, members of parliament, members of standing
committees, are reported. Bloom's bodyguard distribute Maundy money,
commemoration medals, loaves and fishes, temperance badges, expensive
Henry Clay cigars, free cowbones for soup, rubber preservatives in
sealed envelopes tied with gold thread, butter scotch, pineapple rock,_
billets doux _in the form of cocked hats, readymade suits, porringers
of toad in the hole, bottles of Jeyes' Fluid, purchase stamps, 40 days'
indulgences, spurious coins, dairyfed pork sausages, theatre passes,
season tickets available for all tramlines, coupons of the royal and
privileged Hungarian lottery, penny dinner counters, cheap reprints of
the World's Twelve Worst Books: Froggy And Fritz (politic), Care of the
Baby (infantilic), 50 Meals for 7/6 (culinic), Was Jesus a Sun Myth?
(historic), Expel that Pain (medic), Infant's Compendium of the
Universe (cosmic), Let's All Chortle (hilaric), Canvasser's Vade Mecum
(journalic), Loveletters of Mother Assistant (erotic), Who's Who in
Space (astric), Songs that Reached Our Heart (melodic), Pennywise's Way
to Wealth (parsimonic). A general rush and scramble. Women press forward
to touch the hem of Bloom's robe. The Lady Gwendolen Dubedat bursts
through the throng, leaps on his horse and kisses him on both cheeks
amid great acclamation. A magnesium flashlight photograph is taken.
Babes and sucklings are held up.)_

THE WOMEN: Little father! Little father!

THE BABES AND SUCKLINGS:

     Clap clap hands till Poldy comes home,
     Cakes in his pocket for Leo alone.


_(Bloom, bending down, pokes Baby Boardman gently in the stomach.)_

BABY BOARDMAN: _(Hiccups, curdled milk flowing from his mouth)_
Hajajaja.

BLOOM: _(Shaking hands with a blind stripling)_ My more than Brother!
_(Placing his arms round the shoulders of an old couple)_ Dear old
friends! _(He plays pussy fourcorners with ragged boys and girls)_
Peep! Bopeep! _(He wheels twins in a perambulator)_ Ticktacktwo
wouldyousetashoe? _(He performs juggler's tricks, draws red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet silk handkerchiefs from his
mouth)_ Roygbiv. 32 feet per second. _(He consoles a widow)_ Absence
makes the heart grow younger. _(He dances the Highland fling with
grotesque antics)_ Leg it, ye devils! _(He kisses the bedsores of a
palsied veteran_) Honourable wounds! _(He trips up a fit policeman)_
U. p: up. U. p: up. _(He whispers in the ear of a blushing waitress and
laughs kindly)_ Ah, naughty, naughty! _(He eats a raw turnip offered
him by Maurice Butterly, farmer)_ Fine! Splendid! _(He refuses to
accept three shillings offered him by Joseph Hynes, journalist)_ My dear
fellow, not at all! (He gives his coat to a beggar) Please accept. _(He
takes part in a stomach race with elderly male and female cripples)_
Come on, boys! Wriggle it, girls!

THE CITIZEN: _(Choked with emotion, brushes aside a tear in his emerald
muffler)_ May the good God bless him!

_(The rams' horns sound for silence. The standard of Zion is hoisted.)_

BLOOM: _(Uncloaks impressively, revealing obesity, unrolls a paper and
reads solemnly)_ Aleph Beth Ghimel Daleth Hagadah Tephilim Kosher Yom
Kippur Hanukah Roschaschana Beni Brith Bar Mitzvah Mazzoth Askenazim
Meshuggah Talith.

_(An official translation is read by Jimmy Henry, assistant town
clerk.)_

JIMMY HENRY: The Court of Conscience is now open. His Most Catholic
Majesty will now administer open air justice. Free medical and legal
advice, solution of doubles and other problems. All cordially invited.
Given at this our loyal city of Dublin in the year I of the Paradisiacal
Era.

PADDY LEONARD: What am I to do about my rates and taxes?

BLOOM: Pay them, my friend.

PADDY LEONARD: Thank you.

NOSEY FLYNN: Can I raise a mortgage on my fire insurance?

BLOOM: _(Obdurately)_ Sirs, take notice that by the law of torts you are
bound over in your own recognisances for six months in the sum of five
pounds.

J. J. O'MOLLOY: A Daniel did I say? Nay! A Peter O'Brien!

NOSEY FLYNN: Where do I draw the five pounds?

PISSER BURKE: For bladder trouble?

BLOOM:

     _Acid. nit. hydrochlor. dil.,_ 20 minims
     _Tinct. nux vom.,_ 5 minims
     _Extr. taraxel. iiq.,_ 30 minims.
     _Aq. dis. ter in die._

CHRIS CALLINAN: What is the parallax of the subsolar ecliptic of
Aldebaran?

BLOOM: Pleased to hear from you, Chris. K. II.

JOE HYNES: Why aren't you in uniform?

BLOOM: When my progenitor of sainted memory wore the uniform of the
Austrian despot in a dank prison where was yours?

BEN DOLLARD: Pansies?

BLOOM: Embellish (beautify) suburban gardens.

BEN DOLLARD: When twins arrive?

BLOOM: Father (pater, dad) starts thinking.

LARRY O'ROURKE: An eightday licence for my new premises. You remember
me, sir Leo, when you were in number seven. I'm sending around a dozen
of stout for the missus.

BLOOM: _(Coldly)_ You have the advantage of me. Lady Bloom accepts no
presents.

CROFTON: This is indeed a festivity.

BLOOM: _(Solemnly)_ You call it a festivity. I call it a sacrament.

ALEXANDER KEYES: When will we have our own house of keys?

BLOOM: I stand for the reform of municipal morals and the plain ten
commandments. New worlds for old. Union of all, jew, moslem and gentile.
Three acres and a cow for all children of nature. Saloon motor hearses.
Compulsory manual labour for all. All parks open to the public day and
night. Electric dishscrubbers. Tuberculosis, lunacy, war and mendicancy
must now cease. General amnesty, weekly carnival with masked licence,
bonuses for all, esperanto the universal language with universal
brotherhood. No more patriotism of barspongers and dropsical impostors.
Free money, free rent, free love and a free lay church in a free lay
state.

O'MADDEN BURKE: Free fox in a free henroost.

DAVY BYRNE: _(Yawning)_ Iiiiiiiiiaaaaaaach!

BLOOM: Mixed races and mixed marriage.

LENEHAN: What about mixed bathing?

_(bloom explains to those near him his schemes for social regeneration.
All agree with him. The keeper of the Kildare Street Museum appears,
dragging a lorry on which are the shaking statues of several naked
goddesses, Venus Callipyge, Venus Pandemos, Venus Metempsychosis, and
plaster figures, also naked, representing the new nine muses, Commerce,
Operatic Music, Amor, Publicity, Manufacture, Liberty of Speech, Plural
Voting, Gastronomy, Private Hygiene, Seaside Concert Entertainments,
Painless Obstetrics and Astronomy for the People.)_

FATHER FARLEY: He is an episcopalian, an agnostic, an anythingarian
seeking to overthrow our holy faith.

MRS RIORDAN: _(Tears up her will)_ I'm disappointed in you! You bad man!

MOTHER GROGAN: _(Removes her boot to throw it at Bloom)_ You beast! You
abominable person!

NOSEY FLYNN: Give us a tune, Bloom. One of the old sweet songs.

BLOOM: _(With rollicking humour)_

     I vowed that I never would leave her,
     She turned out a cruel deceiver.
     With my tooraloom tooraloom tooraloom tooraloom.

HOPPY HOLOHAN: Good old Bloom! There's nobody like him after all.

PADDY LEONARD: Stage Irishman!

BLOOM: What railway opera is like a tramline in Gibraltar? The Rows of
Casteele._(Laughter.)_

LENEHAN: Plagiarist! Down with Bloom!

THE VEILED SIBYL: _(Enthusiastically)_ I'm a Bloomite and I glory in it.
I believe in him in spite of all. I'd give my life for him, the funniest
man on earth.

BLOOM: _(Winks at the bystanders)_ I bet she's a bonny lassie.

THEODORE PUREFOY: _(In fishingcap and oilskin jacket)_ He employs a
mechanical device to frustrate the sacred ends of nature.

THE VEILED SIBYL: _(Stabs herself)_ My hero god! _(She dies)_

_(Many most attractive and enthusiastic women also commit suicide by
stabbing, drowning, drinking prussic acid, aconite, arsenic, opening
their veins, refusing food, casting themselves under steamrollers, from
the top of Nelson's Pillar, into the great vat of Guinness's brewery,
asphyxiating themselves by placing their heads in gasovens, hanging
themselves in stylish garters, leaping from windows of different
storeys.)_

ALEXANDER J DOWIE: _(Violently)_ Fellowchristians and antiBloomites, the
man called Bloom is from the roots of hell, a disgrace to christian
men. A fiendish libertine from his earliest years this stinking goat
of Mendes gave precocious signs of infantile debauchery, recalling the
cities of the plain, with a dissolute granddam. This vile hypocrite,
bronzed with infamy, is the white bull mentioned in the Apocalypse.
A worshipper of the Scarlet Woman, intrigue is the very breath of his
nostrils. The stake faggots and the caldron of boiling oil are for him.
Caliban!

THE MOB: Lynch him! Roast him! He's as bad as Parnell was. Mr Fox!

_(Mother Grogan throws her boot at Bloom. Several shopkeepers from upper
and lower Dorset street throw objects of little or no commercial value,
hambones, condensed milk tins, unsaleable cabbage, stale bread, sheep's
tails, odd pieces of fat.)_

BLOOM: _(Excitedly)_ This is midsummer madness, some ghastly joke again.
By heaven, I am guiltless as the unsunned snow! It was my brother Henry.
He is my double. He lives in number 2 Dolphin's Barn. Slander, the
viper, has wrongfully accused me. Fellowcountrymen, _sgenl inn ban bata
coisde gan capall._ I call on my old friend, Dr Malachi Mulligan, sex
specialist, to give medical testimony on my behalf.

DR MULLIGAN: _(In motor jerkin, green motorgoggles on his brow)_ Dr
Bloom is bisexually abnormal. He has recently escaped from Dr Eustace's
private asylum for demented gentlemen. Born out of bedlock hereditary
epilepsy is present, the consequence of unbridled lust. Traces of
elephantiasis have been discovered among his ascendants. There are
marked symptoms of chronic exhibitionism. Ambidexterity is also
latent. He is prematurely bald from selfabuse, perversely idealistic in
consequence, a reformed rake, and has metal teeth. In consequence of a
family complex he has temporarily lost his memory and I believe him
to be more sinned against than sinning. I have made a pervaginal
examination and, after application of the acid test to 5427 anal,
axillary, pectoral and pubic hairs, I declare him to be _virgo intacta._

_(Bloom holds his high grade hat over his genital organs.)_

DR MADDEN: Hypsospadia is also marked. In the interest of coming
generations I suggest that the parts affected should be preserved in
spirits of wine in the national teratological museum.

DR CROTTHERS: I have examined the patient's urine. It is albuminoid.
Salivation is insufficient, the patellar reflex intermittent.

DR PUNCH COSTELLO: The _fetor judaicus_ is most perceptible.

DR DIXON: _(Reads a bill of health)_ Professor Bloom is a finished
example of the new womanly man. His moral nature is simple and lovable.
Many have found him a dear man, a dear person. He is a rather quaint
fellow on the whole, coy though not feebleminded in the medical sense.
He has written a really beautiful letter, a poem in itself, to the court
missionary of the Reformed Priests' Protection Society which clears up
everything. He is practically a total abstainer and I can affirm that
he sleeps on a straw litter and eats the most Spartan food, cold dried
grocer's peas. He wears a hairshirt of pure Irish manufacture winter and
summer and scourges himself every Saturday. He was, I understand, at one
time a firstclass misdemeanant in Glencree reformatory. Another report
states that he was a very posthumous child. I appeal for clemency in the
name of the most sacred word our vocal organs have ever been called upon
to speak. He is about to have a baby.

_(General commotion and compassion. Women faint. A wealthy American
makes a street collection for Bloom. Gold and silver coins, blank
cheques, banknotes, jewels, treasury bonds, maturing bills of exchange,
I. O. U's, wedding rings, watchchains, lockets, necklaces and bracelets
are rapidly collected.)_

BLOOM: O, I so want to be a mother.

MRS THORNTON: _(In nursetender's gown)_ Embrace me tight, dear. You'll
be soon over it. Tight, dear.

_(Bloom embraces her tightly and bears eight male yellow and white
children. They appear on a redcarpeted staircase adorned with expensive
plants. All the octuplets are handsome, with valuable metallic faces,
wellmade, respectably dressed and wellconducted, speaking five modern
languages fluently and interested in various arts and sciences. Each
has his name printed in legible letters on his shirtfront: Nasodoro,
Goldfinger, Chrysostomos, Maindoree, Silversmile, Silberselber,
Vifargent, Panargyros. They are immediately appointed to positions of
high public trust in several different countries as managing directors
of banks, traffic managers of railways, chairmen of limited liability
companies, vicechairmen of hotel syndicates.)_

A VOICE: Bloom, are you the Messiah ben Joseph or ben David?

BLOOM: _(Darkly)_ You have said it.

BROTHER BUZZ: Then perform a miracle like Father Charles.

BANTAM LYONS: Prophesy who will win the Saint Leger.

_(Bloom walks on a net, covers his left eye with his left ear, passes
through several walls, climbs Nelson's Pillar, hangs from the top ledge
by his eyelids, eats twelve dozen oysters (shells included), heals
several sufferers from king's evil, contracts his face so as to resemble
many historical personages, Lord Beaconsfield, Lord Byron, Wat Tyler,
Moses of Egypt, Moses Maimonides, Moses Mendelssohn, Henry Irving, Rip
van Winkle, Kossuth, Jean Jacques Rousseau, Baron Leopold Rothschild,
Robinson Crusoe, Sherlock Holmes, Pasteur, turns each foot
simultaneously in different directions, bids the tide turn back,
eclipses the sun by extending his little finger.)_

BRINI, PAPAL NUNCIO: _(In papal zouave's uniform, steel cuirasses as
breastplate, armplates, thighplates, legplates, large profane moustaches
and brown paper mitre) Leopoldi autem generatio._ Moses begat Noah
and Noah begat Eunuch and Eunuch begat O'Halloran and O'Halloran begat
Guggenheim and Guggenheim begat Agendath and Agendath begat Netaim and
Netaim begat Le Hirsch and Le Hirsch begat Jesurum and Jesurum begat
MacKay and MacKay begat Ostrolopsky and Ostrolopsky begat Smerdoz
and Smerdoz begat Weiss and Weiss begat Schwarz and Schwarz begat
Adrianopoli and Adrianopoli begat Aranjuez and Aranjuez begat Lewy
Lawson and Lewy Lawson begat Ichabudonosor and Ichabudonosor begat
O'Donnell Magnus and O'Donnell Magnus begat Christbaum and Christbaum
begat ben Maimun and ben Maimun begat Dusty Rhodes and Dusty Rhodes
begat Benamor and Benamor begat Jones-Smith and Jones-Smith begat
Savorgnanovich and Savorgnanovich begat Jasperstone and Jasperstone
begat Vingtetunieme and Vingtetunieme begat Szombathely and Szombathely
begat Virag and Virag begat Bloom _et vocabitur nomen eius Emmanuel._

A DEADHAND: _(Writes on the wall)_ Bloom is a cod.

CRAB: _(In bushranger's kit)_ What did you do in the cattlecreep behind
Kilbarrack?

A FEMALE INFANT: _(Shakes a rattle)_ And under Ballybough bridge?

A HOLLYBUSH: And in the devil's glen?

BLOOM: _(Blushes furiously all over from frons to nates, three tears
filling from his left eye)_ Spare my past.

THE IRISH EVICTED TENANTS: _(In bodycoats, kneebreeches, with Donnybrook
fair shillelaghs)_ Sjambok him!

_(Bloom with asses' ears seats himself in the pillory with crossed arms,
his feet protruding. He whistles_ Don Giovanni, a cenar teco. _Artane
orphans, joining hands, caper round him. Girls of the Prison Gate
Mission, joining hands, caper round in the opposite direction.)_

THE ARTANE ORPHANS:

     You hig, you hog, you dirty dog!
     You think the ladies love you!
     THE PRISON GATE GIRLS:


     If you see Kay
     Tell him he may
     See you in tea
     Tell him from me.

HORNBLOWER: _(In ephod and huntingcap, announces)_ And he shall carry
the sins of the people to Azazel, the spirit which is in the wilderness,
and to Lilith, the nighthag. And they shall stone him and defile him,
yea, all from Agendath Netaim and from Mizraim, the land of Ham.

_(All the people cast soft pantomime stones at Bloom. Many bonafide
travellers and ownerless dogs come near him and defile him. Mastiansky
and Citron approach in gaberdines, wearing long earlocks. They wag their
beards at Bloom.)_

MASTIANSKY AND CITRON: Belial! Laemlein of Istria, the false Messiah!
Abulafia! Recant!

_(George R Mesias, Bloom's tailor, appears, a tailor's goose under his
arm, presenting a bill)_

MESIAS: To alteration one pair trousers eleven shillings.

BLOOM: _(Rubs his hands cheerfully)_ Just like old times. Poor Bloom!

_(Reuben J Dodd, blackbearded iscariot, bad shepherd, bearing on his
shoulders the drowned corpse of his son, approaches the pillory.)_

REUBEN J: _(Whispers hoarsely)_ The squeak is out. A split is gone for
the flatties. Nip the first rattler.

THE FIRE BRIGADE: Pflaap!

BROTHER BUZZ: _(Invests Bloom in a yellow habit with embroidery of
painted flames and high pointed hat. He places a bag of gunpowder round
his neck and hands him over to the civil power, saying)_ Forgive him his
trespasses.

_(Lieutenant Myers of the Dublin Fire Brigade by general request sets
fire to Bloom. Lamentations.)_

THE CITIZEN: Thank heaven!

BLOOM: _(In a seamless garment marked I. H. S. stands upright amid
phoenix flames)_ Weep not for me, O daughters of Erin.

_(He exhibits to Dublin reporters traces of burning. The daughters of
Erin, in black garments, with large prayerbooks and long lighted candles
in their hands, kneel down and pray.)_

THE DAUGHTERS OF ERIN:

     Kidney of Bloom, pray for us
     Flower of the Bath, pray for us
     Mentor of Menton, pray for us
     Canvasser for the Freeman, pray for us
     Charitable Mason, pray for us
     Wandering Soap, pray for us
     Sweets of Sin, pray for us
     Music without Words, pray for us
     Reprover of the Citizen, pray for us
     Friend of all Frillies, pray for us
     Midwife Most Merciful, pray for us
     Potato Preservative against Plague and Pestilence, pray for us.

_(A choir of six hundred voices, conducted by Vincent O'brien, sings
the chorus from Handel's Messiah alleluia for the lord god omnipotent
reigneth, accompanied on the organ by Joseph Glynn. Bloom becomes mute,
shrunken, carbonised.)_


ZOE: Talk away till you're black in the face.

BLOOM: _(In caubeen with clay pipe stuck in the band, dusty brogues, an
emigrant's red handkerchief bundle in his hand, leading a black bogoak
pig by a sugaun, with a smile in his eye)_ Let me be going now, woman of
the house, for by all the goats in Connemara I'm after having the
father and mother of a bating. _(With a tear in his eye)_ All insanity.
Patriotism, sorrow for the dead, music, future of the race. To be or not
to be. Life's dream is o'er. End it peacefully. They can live on. _(He
gazes far away mournfully)_ I am ruined. A few pastilles of aconite. The
blinds drawn. A letter. Then lie back to rest. _(He breathes softly)_ No
more. I have lived. Fare. Farewell.

ZOE: _(Stiffly, her finger in her neckfillet)_ Honest? Till the next
time. _(She sneers)_ Suppose you got up the wrong side of the bed or
came too quick with your best girl. O, I can read your thoughts!

BLOOM: _(Bitterly)_ Man and woman, love, what is it? A cork and bottle.
I'm sick of it. Let everything rip.

ZOE: _(In sudden sulks)_ I hate a rotter that's insincere. Give a
bleeding whore a chance.

BLOOM: _(Repentantly)_ I am very disagreeable. You are a necessary evil.
Where are you from? London?

ZOE: _(Glibly)_ Hog's Norton where the pigs plays the organs. I'm
Yorkshire born. _(She holds his hand which is feeling for her nipple)_
I say, Tommy Tittlemouse. Stop that and begin worse. Have you cash for a
short time? Ten shillings?

BLOOM: _(Smiles, nods slowly)_ More, houri, more.

ZOE: And more's mother? _(She pats him offhandedly with velvet paws)_
Are you coming into the musicroom to see our new pianola? Come and I'll
peel off.

BLOOM: _(Feeling his occiput dubiously with the unparalleled
embarrassment of a harassed pedlar gauging the symmetry of her peeled
pears)_ Somebody would be dreadfully jealous if she knew. The greeneyed
monster. _(Earnestly)_ You know how difficult it is. I needn't tell you.

ZOE: _(Flattered)_ What the eye can't see the heart can't grieve for.
_(She pats him)_ Come.

BLOOM: Laughing witch! The hand that rocks the cradle.

ZOE: Babby!

BLOOM: _(In babylinen and pelisse, bigheaded, with a caul of dark hair,
fixes big eyes on her fluid slip and counts its bronze buckles with a
chubby finger, his moist tongue lolling and lisping)_ One two tlee: tlee
tlwo tlone.

THE BUCKLES: Love me. Love me not. Love me.

ZOE: Silent means consent. _(With little parted talons she captures his
hand, her forefinger giving to his palm the passtouch of secret monitor,
luring him to doom.)_ Hot hands cold gizzard.

_(He hesitates amid scents, music, temptations. She leads him towards
the steps, drawing him by the odour of her armpits, the vice of her
painted eyes, the rustle of her slip in whose sinuous folds lurks the
lion reek of all the male brutes that have possessed her.)_

THE MALE BRUTES: _(Exhaling sulphur of rut and dung and ramping in their
loosebox, faintly roaring, their drugged heads swaying to and fro)_
Good!

_(Zoe and Bloom reach the doorway where two sister whores are seated.
They examine him curiously from under their pencilled brows and smile to
his hasty bow. He trips awkwardly.)_

ZOE: _(Her lucky hand instantly saving him)_ Hoopsa! Don't fall
upstairs.

BLOOM: The just man falls seven times. _(He stands aside at the
threshold)_ After you is good manners.

ZOE: Ladies first, gentlemen after.

_(She crosses the threshold. He hesitates. She turns and, holding out
her hands, draws him over. He hops. On the antlered rack of the hall
hang a man 's hat and waterproof. Bloom uncovers himself but, seeing
them, frowns, then smiles, preoccupied. A door on the return landing is
flung open. A man in purple shirt and grey trousers, brownsocked, passes
with an ape's gait, his bald head and goatee beard upheld, hugging a
full waterjugjar, his twotailed black braces dangling at heels. Averting
his face quickly Bloom bends to examine on the halltable the spaniel
eyes of a running fox: then, his lifted head sniffing, follows Zoe
into the musicroom. A shade of mauve tissuepaper dims the light of the
chandelier. Round and round a moth flies, colliding, escaping. The
floor is covered with an oilcloth mosaic of jade and azure and cinnabar
rhomboids. Footmarks are stamped over it in all senses, heel to heel,
heel to hollow, toe to toe, feet locked, a morris of shuffling feet
without body phantoms, all in a scrimmage higgledypiggledy. The walls
are tapestried with a paper of yewfronds and clear glades. In the grate
is spread a screen of peacock feathers. Lynch squats crosslegged on
the hearthrug of matted hair, his cap back to the front. With a wand he
beats time slowly. Kitty Ricketts, a bony pallid whore in navy costume,
doeskin gloves rolled back from a coral wristlet, a chain purse in
her hand, sits perched on the edge of the table swinging her leg and
glancing at herself in the gilt mirror over the mantelpiece. A tag
of her corsetlace hangs slightly below her jacket. Lynch indicates
mockingly the couple at the piano.)_
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

KITTY: _(Coughs behind her hand)_ She's a bit imbecillic. _(She signs
with a waggling forefinger)_ Blemblem. _(Lynch lifts up her skirt and
white petticoat with his wand she settles them down quickly.)_ Respect
yourself. _(She hiccups, then bends quickly her sailor hat under which
her hair glows, red with henna)_ O, excuse!

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***
=======
ZOE: More limelight, Charley. _(She goes to the chandelier and turns the
gas full cock)_
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

KITTY: _(Peers at the gasjet)_ What ails it tonight?

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
=======
LYNCH: _(Deeply)_ Enter a ghost and hobgoblins.
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

ZOE: Clap on the back for Zoe.

<<<<<<< Updated upstream

The Iliad of Homer


Translated by Alexander Pope,

with notes by the
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.

and

Flaxman's Designs.

1899





CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION.
POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER
BOOK I.
BOOK II.
BOOK III.
BOOK IV.
BOOK V.
BOOK VI.
BOOK VII.
BOOK VIII.
BOOK IX.
BOOK X.
BOOK XI.
BOOK XII.
BOOK XIII.
BOOK XIV.
BOOK XV.
BOOK XVI.
BOOK XVII.
BOOK XVIII.
BOOK XIX.
BOOK XX.
BOOK XXI.
BOOK XXII.
BOOK XXIII.
BOOK XXIV.
CONCLUDING NOTE.





ILLUSTRATIONS


HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.
MARS.
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.
VULCAN.
JUPITER.
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.
NEPTUNE.
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.
VENUS.
Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.
Map of the Plain of Troy.
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.
JUNO.
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
BOWS AND BOW CASE.
IRIS.
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.
GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.
THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.
PLUTO.
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.
GREEK GALLEY.
PROSERPINE.
ACHILLES.
DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.
THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.
HERCULES.
POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.
GREEK ALTAR.
NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.
GREEK EARRINGS.
SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.
GREEK SHIELD.
BACCHUS.
AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.
CASTOR AND POLLUX.
Buckles.
DIANA.
SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.
ÃSCULAPIUS.
FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.
VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.
THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.
JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.
TRIPOD.
THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.
VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.
THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.
HERCULES.
THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.
CENTAUR.
ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.
THE BATH.
ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.
THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.
CERES.
HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.
IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.
FUNERAL OF HECTOR.





INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the most
part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very gradual
character of our education, we must continually forget, and emancipate
ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set aside old
notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be daily
unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and anxiety to
acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu of
their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues of
sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as powerful a
touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy scepticism of a
temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of conservatism, or the
impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church. History and tradition,
whether of ancient or comparatively recent times, are subjected to very
different handling from that which the indulgence or credulity of former
ages could allow. Mere statements are jealously watched, and the motives
of the writer form as important an ingredient in the analysis of his
history, as the facts he records. Probability is a powerful and
troublesome test; and it is by this troublesome standard that a large
portion of historical evidence is sifted. Consistency is no less
pertinacious and exacting in its demands. In brief, to write a history, we
must know more than mere facts. Human nature, viewed under an induction of
extended experience, is the best help to the criticism of human history.
Historical characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form correct
views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a great
whole--we must measure them by their relation to the mass of beings by whom
they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents in their lives or
condition which tradition has handed down to us, we must rather consider
the general bearing of the whole narrative, than the respective
probability of its details.

It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere(1) have, perhaps,
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all three
has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left us
little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in which
critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon everything
else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or less of doubt
and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the contradictions of
Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one of the _dramatis
personae_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in style. He appears as
the enunciator of opinions as different in their tone as those of the
writers who have handed them down. When we have read Plato _or_ Xenophon,
we think we know something of Socrates; when we have fairly read and
examined both, we feel convinced that we are something worse than
ignorant.

It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny the
personal or real existence of men and things whose life and condition were
too much for our belief. This system--which has often comforted the
religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of Strauss for those
of the New Testament--has been of incalculable value to the historical
theorists of the last and present centuries. To question the existence of
Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than to believe in
that of Romulus. To deny a fact related in Herodotus, because it is
inconsistent with a theory developed from an Assyrian inscription which no
two scholars read in the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in
the good-natured old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has
idealized--_Numa Pompilius._

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer, and
the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free permission
to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all written tradition,
concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and Odyssey. What few
authorities exist on the subject, are summarily dismissed, although the
arguments appear to run in a circle. "This cannot be true, because it is
not true; and, that is not true, because it cannot be true." Such seems to
be the style, in which testimony upon testimony, statement upon statement,
is consigned to denial and oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of the
Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken of the
treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of Cumae in Ãolia, was, at an early
period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of Greece.
Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes. Although poor,
he married, and the result of the union was a girl named Critheis. The
girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the guardianship of
Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this maiden that we "are
indebted for so much happiness." Homer was the first fruit of her juvenile
frailty, and received the name of Melesigenes, from having been born near
the river Meles, in Boeotia, whither Critheis had been transported in
order to save her reputation.

"At this time," continues our narrative, "there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being married,
engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he received as
the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was her performance
of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made proposals of
marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement, willing to adopt her
son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man, if he were carefully
brought up."

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon followed.
Melesigenes carried on his adopted father's school with great success,
exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna, but also of
the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially in the
exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these visitors, one
Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who evinced a knowledge and
intelligence rarely found in those times, persuaded Melesigenes to close
his school, and accompany him on his travels. He promised not only to pay
his expenses, but to furnish him with a further stipend, urging, that,
"While he was yet young, it was fitting that he should see with his own
eyes the countries and cities which might hereafter be the subjects of his
discourses." Melesigenes consented, and set out with his patron,
"examining all the curiosities of the countries they visited, and
informing himself of everything by interrogating those whom he met." We
may also suppose, that he wrote memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of
preservation(2) Having set sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached
Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who had already suffered in his eyes, became
much worse, and Mentes, who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to
the medical superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of
Alcinor. Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly
became acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards
formed the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that
it was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.(3)

But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae. Here
his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of one
Tychias, an armourer. "And up to my time," continued the author, "the
inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a recitation
of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also a poplar
grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes arrived".(4)

But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph on
Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater probability,
been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.(5)

Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the _converzationes_(6) of the old men,
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a public
maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously  renowned. They
avowed their willingness to support him in the measure he proposed, and
procured him an audience in the council. Having made the speech, with the
purport of which our author has forgotten to acquaint us, he retired, and
left them to debate respecting the answer to be given to his proposal.

The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet's demand,
but one man observed that "if they were to feed _Homers,_ they would be
encumbered with a multitude of useless people." "From this circumstance,"
says the writer, "Melesigenes acquired the name of Homer, for the Cumans
call blind men _Homers._"(7) With a love of economy, which shows how
similar the world has always been in its treatment of literary men, the
pension was denied, and the poet vented his disappointment in a wish that
Cumoea might never produce a poet capable of giving it renown and glory.

At Phocoea, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient poetry
to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary publishers,
neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him. At his
departure, Homer is said to have observed: "O Thestorides, of the many
things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more unintelligible
than the human heart."(8)

Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him recite,
acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a profitable
livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at once determined
him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be setting sail
thither, but he found one ready to Start for Erythrae, a town of Ionia,
which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the seamen to allow him to
accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a favourable wind, and prayed
that he might be able to expose the imposture of Thestorides, who, by his
breach of hospitality, had drawn down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty, reached
the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure, which we will
continue in the words of our author. "Having set out from Pithys, Homer
went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were pasturing. The
dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus (for that was the
name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up quickly, called off his
dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For or some time he stood wondering
how a blind man should have reached such a place alone, and what could be
his design in coming. He then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and
how he had come to desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he
stood in need. Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his
misfortunes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and led him to
his cot, and having lit a fire, bade him sup.(9)

"The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according to
their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O Glaucus, my
friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs their supper at
the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since, whilst they watch, nor
thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author. Having
finished supper, they banqueted(10) afresh on conversation, Homer
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.

At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left Homer
at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus, a place
near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole story
respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to what he
said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and feeding maimed
and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the stranger to him.

Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him, assuring
him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon showed that
the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general knowledge, and the
Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the charge of his
children.(11)

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry. "To
this day," says Chandler,(12) "the most curious remain is that which has
been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the coast, at
some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have been an open
temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape is oval, and in
the centre is the image of the goddess, the head and an arm wanting. She
is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair has a lion carved on each
side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a low rim, or seat, and
about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of the mountain, is rude,
indistinct, and probably of the most remote antiquity."

So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable fortune.
He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single, the other
married a Chian.

The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the personages
of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already been
mentioned:--

"In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his poem
as the companion of Ulysses,(13) in return for the care taken of him when
afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to Phemius, who
had given him both sustenance and instruction."

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to visit
Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is said, made
some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity of the
Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,(14) he sent out
for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him in
Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in celebrating the
Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave great satisfaction,
and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon festivals, he earned a
subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, with whose children he was
very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios, now
Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his death
arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma proposed
by some fishermen's children.(15)

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we possess,
and so broad are the evidences of its historical worthlessness, that it is
scarcely necessary to point them out in detail. Let us now consider some
of the opinions to which a persevering, patient, and learned--but by no
means consistent--series of investigations has led. In doing so, I profess
to bring forward statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or
probability.

"Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who have
done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The majestic
stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the Nile, through
many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the Nile, its fountains
will ever remain concealed."

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics has
eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the Homeric
question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he proceeds:--

"It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the region
of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The creations of
genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for the most part,
created far out of the reach of observation. If we were in possession of
all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly explain the origin
of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in all essential points,
must have remained the secret of the poet." (16)

From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of human
nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic investigation, let
us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer an individual?(17) or
were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious arrangement of
fragments by earlier poets?

Well has Landor remarked: "Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our devotion
to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know what is good
for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our admiration of good.
No man living venerates Homer more than I do." (18)

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and fostered,
without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions by minute
analysis--our editorial office compels us to give some attention to the
doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric question is beset, and to
entreat our reader, for a brief period, to prefer his judgment to his
imagination, and to condescend to dry details.

Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of this
unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must express my
sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following remarks:--

"We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the better,
the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its original
composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that its primitive
integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to assert, that the
minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not the best qualification
for the profound feeling, the comprehensive conception of an harmonious
whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be no judge of the symmetry of the
human frame: and we would take the opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on
the proportions and general beauty of a form, rather than that of Mr.
Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

"There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines of
Pope.--

  "'The critic eye--that microscope of wit
  Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
  How parts relate to parts, or they to whole
  The body's harmony, the beaming soul,
  Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
  When man's whole frame is obvious to a flea.'"(19)

Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning the
unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and cautious
Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,(20) the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion touching
the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad,(21) and, among a
mass of ancient authors, whose very names(22) it would be tedious to
detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever arose. So
far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our early ideas on
the subject; let us now see what are the discoveries to which more modern
investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on the
subject, and we find Bentley remarking that "Homer wrote a sequel of songs
and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and good cheer,
at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs were not
collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about Peisistratus'
time, about five hundred years after."(23)

Two French writers--Hedelin and Perrault--avowed a similar scepticism on the
subject; but it is in the "Scienza Nuova" of Battista Vico, that we first
meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf with so
much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian theory that we
have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold hypothesis, which we
will detail in the words of Grote(24)--

"Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of the
Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by no means
the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously announced
by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent portions of the
Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into any compact body and
unchangeable order, until the days of Peisistratus, in the sixth century
before Christ. As a step towards that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no
written copies of either poem could be shown to have existed during the
earlier times, to which their composition is referred; and that without
writing, neither the perfect symmetry of so complicated a work could have
been originally conceived by any poet, nor, if realized by him,
transmitted with assurance to posterity. The absence of easy and
convenient writing, such as must be indispensably supposed for long
manuscripts, among the early Greeks, was thus one of the points in Wolf's
case against the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch,
and other leading opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the
other seems to have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been
considered incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character
of the Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from
the beginning.

"To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that view
of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to controvert it, we
were driven to the necessity of admitting long written poems, in the ninth
century before the Christian aera. Few things, in my opinion, can be more
improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight, opposed as he is to the Wolfian
hypothesis, admits this no less than Wolf himself. The traces of writing
in Greece, even in the seventh century before the Christian aera, are
exceedingly trifling. We have no remaining inscription earlier than the
fortieth Olympiad, and the early inscriptions are rude and unskilfully
executed; nor can we even assure ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides
of Amorgus, Kallinus, Tyrtaeus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and
lyric poets, committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the
practice of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which
authorizes us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the
famous ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the
Panathenaea: but for what length of time previously manuscripts had
existed, we are unable to say.

"Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry--for they admit generally
that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and heard,--but upon
the supposed necessity that there must have been manuscripts to ensure the
preservation of the poems--the unassisted memory of reciters being neither
sufficient nor trustworthy. But here we only escape a smaller difficulty
by running into a greater; for the existence of trained bards, gifted with
extraordinary memory, (25) is far less astonishing than that of long
manuscripts, in an age essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when
even suitable instruments and materials for the process are not obvious.
Moreover, there is a strong positive reason for believing that the bard
was under no necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a
manuscript; for if such had been the fact, blindness would have been a
disqualification for the profession, which we know that it was not, as
well from the example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the
blind bard of Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as
well as the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer
himself. The author of that hymn, be he who he may, could never have
described a blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he
had been conscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by
constant reference to the manuscript in his chest."

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon which
even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond a doubt,
that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a considerable
change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the Homeric poems
could have suffered by this change, had written copies been preserved. If
Chaucer's poetry, for instance, had not been written, it could only have
come down to us in a softened form, more like the effeminate version of
Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble original.

"At what period," continues Grote, "these poems, or indeed any other Greek
poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture, though
there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of Solon. If, in
the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any more determinate
period, the question a once suggests itself, What were the purposes which,
in that state of society, a manuscript at its first commencement must have
been intended to answer? For whom was a written Iliad necessary? Not for
the rhapsodes; for with them it was not only planted in the memory, but
also interwoven with the feelings, and conceived in conjunction with all
those flexions and intonations of voice, pauses, and other oral artifices
which were required for emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript
could never reproduce. Not for the general public--they were accustomed to
receive it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a
solemn and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad
would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class
of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed. If
we could discover at what time such a class first began to be formed, we
should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic poems were
first committed to writing. Now the period which may with the greatest
probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the formation even of
the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle of the seventh
century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C. 630), the age of
Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, &c. I ground this
supposition on the change then operated in the character and tendencies of
Grecian poetry and music--the elegiac and the iambic measures having been
introduced as rivals to the primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions
having been transferred from the epical past to the affairs of present and
real life. Such a change was important at a time when poetry was the only
known mode of publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable,
yet the nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking
at the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric rhapsodies,
just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and eulogized the Thebais
as the production of Homer. There seems, therefore, ground for
conjecturing that (for the use of this newly-formed and important, but
very narrow class), manuscripts of the Homeric poems and other old
epics,--the Thebais and the Cypria, as well as the Iliad and the
Odyssey,--began to be compiled towards the middle of the seventh century
(B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian commerce, which took place
about the same period, would furnish increased facilities for obtaining
the requisite papyrus to write upon. A reading class, when once formed,
would doubtless slowly increase, and the number of manuscripts along with
it; so that before the time of Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers
and manuscripts, though still comparatively few, might have attained a
certain recognized authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against
the carelessness of individual rhapsodes."(26)

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of the
credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations--


    "There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
    throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
    compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast
    into its present stately and harmonious form by the directions of
    the Athenian ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the
    bright period of Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited
    little more than the fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus,
    Anacreon, and Simonides were employed in the noble task of
    compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much must have been done to
    arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is almost incredible,
    that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should not remain.
    Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies which no
    doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
    Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have
    perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
    caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among
    the heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in
    reducing the Homeric language to its primitive form; however,
    finally, the Attic dialect may not have assumed all its more
    marked and distinguishing characteristics--still it is difficult to
    suppose that the language, particularly in the joinings and
    transitions, and connecting parts, should not more clearly betray
    the incongruity between the more ancient and modern forms of
    expression. It is not quite in character with such a period to
    imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an imperfect poem
    in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott has done in
    his continuation of Sir Tristram.

    "If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of
    Athenian compilation are discoverable in the language of the
    poems, the total absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps
    no less worthy of observation. In later, and it may fairly be
    suspected in earlier times, the Athenians were more than
    ordinarily jealous of the fame of their ancestors. But, amid all
    the traditions of the glories of early Greece embodied in the
    Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and insignificant
    part. Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, Mr.
    Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible, indeed, that
    in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic fact,
    that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
    the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the
    chieftain of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his
    forces, may have been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian
    sovereign; the preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the
    Trojan war may thus have forced the national feeling of the
    Athenians to yield to their taste. The songs which spoke of their
    own great ancestor were, no doubt, of far inferior sublimity and
    popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid would have been much
    more likely to have emanated from an Athenian synod of compilers
    of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid. Could France
    have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the hero of
    the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
    sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all
    its direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the
    poetic cycle, as to admit no rivalry,--it is still surprising, that
    throughout the whole poem the _callida junctura_ should never
    betray the workmanship of an Athenian hand, and that the national
    spirit of a race, who have at a later period not inaptly been
    compared to our self admiring neighbours, the French, should
    submit with lofty self denial to the almost total exclusion of
    their own ancestors--or, at least, to the questionable dignity of
    only having produced a leader tolerably skilled in the military
    tactics of his age."(27)


To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that Wolf's
objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey have never
been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they have failed to
enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the difficulties with
which the whole subject is beset, are rather augmented than otherwise, if
we admit his hypothesis. Nor is Lachmann's(28) modification of his theory
any better. He divides the first twenty-two books of the Iliad into
sixteen different songs, and treats as ridiculous the belief that their
amalgamation into one regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the
age of Peisistratus. This, as Grote observes, "explains the gaps and
contradictions in the narrative, but it explains nothing else." Moreover,
we find no contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called
sixteen poets concur in getting rid of the following leading men in the
first battle after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the
Euboeans; Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of
the Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes
again make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure, that
"it seems strange that any number of independent poets should have so
harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel." The
discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is represented as dead in the fifth
book, weeps at his son's funeral in the thirteenth, can only be regarded
as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann's modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success, that
the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems, or,
supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by Peisistratus, and
not before his time, are essentially distinct. In short, "a man may
believe the Iliad to have been put together out of pre-existing songs,
without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the period of its first
compilation." The friends or literary _employes_ of Peisistratus must have
found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the silence of the
Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic "recension," goes far to
prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts they examined, this was either
wanting, or thought unworthy of attention.

"Moreover," he continues, "the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad or
Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age of
Peisistratus--nothing which brings to our view the alterations brought
about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined money, the
habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican governments,
the close military array, the improved construction of ships, the
Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of religious
festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c., familiar to
the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the other literary
friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to notice, even without
design, had they then, for the first time, undertaken the task of piecing
together many self existent epics into one large aggregate. Everything in
the two great Homeric poems, both in substance and in language, belongs to
an age two or three centuries earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the
interpolations (or those passages which, on the best grounds, are
pronounced to be such) betray no trace of the sixth century before Christ,
and may well have been heard by Archilochus and Kallinus--in some cases
even by Arktinus and Hesiod--as genuine Homeric matter(29) As far as the
evidences on the case, as well internal as external, enable us to judge,
we seem warranted in believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited
substantially as they now stand (always allowing for paitial divergences
of text and interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first trustworthy mark of
Grecian time; and this ancient date, let it be added, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most important attribute of the
Homeric poems, considered in reference to Grecian history; for they thus
afford us an insight into the anti-historical character of the Greeks,
enabling us to trace the subsequent forward march of the nation, and to
seize instructive contrasts between their former and their later
condition."(30)

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of Peisistratus
were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must confess, that I
can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his labours. At the same
time, so far from believing that the composition or primary arrangement of
these poems, in their present form, was the work of Peisistratus, I am
rather persuaded that the fine taste and elegant mind of that Athenian(31)
would lead him to preserve an ancient and traditional order of the poems,
rather than to patch and re-construct them according to a fanciful
hypothesis. I will not repeat the many discussions respecting whether the
poems were written or not, or whether the art of writing was known in the
time of their reputed author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read,
the less satisfied we are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version of
the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical probability
must be measured by that of many others relating to the Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt, made
by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like consistency. It
is as follows:--


    "No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common
    sailors of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to 'discourse
    in excellent music' among them. Many of these, like those of the
    negroes in the United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to
    events passing around them. But what was passing around them? The
    grand events of a spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to
    impress themselves, as the mystical legends of former times had
    done, upon their memory; besides which, a retentive memory was
    deemed a virtue of the first water, and was cultivated accordingly
    in those ancient times. Ballads at first, and down to the
    beginning of the war with Troy, were merely recitations, with an
    intonation. Then followed a species of recitative, probably with
    an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the memory
    considerably.

    "It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war,
    that a poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides,
    but most probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be
    made of great utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the
    social position of Hellas, and, as a collection, he published
    these lays, connecting them by a tale of his own. This poem now
    exists, under the title of the 'Odyssea.' The author, however, did
    not affix his own name to the poem, which, in fact, was, great
    part of it, remodelled from the archaic dialect of Crete, in which
    tongue the ballads were found by him. He therefore called it the
    poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is rather a proof of
    his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging arrangement of
    other people's ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed, arguing
    for the unity of authorship, 'a great poet might have re-cast
    pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no
    mere arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.'

    "While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a
    ballad, recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble
    mind seized the hint that there presented itself, and the
    Achilleis(32) grew under his hand. Unity of design, however,
    caused him to publish the poem under the same pseudonyme as his
    former work: and the disjointed lays of the ancient bards were
    joined together, like those relating to the Cid, into a chronicle
    history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that the poem was
    destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but, first,
    the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
    corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the
    streets, assemblies, and agoras. However, Solon first, and then
    Peisistratus, and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the
    poems, and restored the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their
    original integrity in a great measure."(33)


Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which have
developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I must
still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of the
Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations disfigure
them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here and there
have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of the copyist,
would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a higher
criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or enjoy
these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of their one
author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari eum jus
fasque sit,_ I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of historical
evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these great works to
a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal evidence, and that
which springs from the deepest and most immediate impulse of the soul,
also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise. Indeed,
considering the character of some of my own books, such an attempt would
be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its importance in a
philological view, I am inclined to set little store on its aesthetic
value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the emendations made upon
poets are mere alterations, some of which, had they been suggested to the
author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he would probably have adopted.
Moreover, those who are most exact in laying down rules of verbal
criticism and interpretation, are often least competent to carry out their
own precepts. Grammarians are not poets by profession, but may be so _per
accidens._ I do not at this moment remember two emendations on Homer,
calculated to substantially improve the poetry of a passage, although a
mass of remarks, from Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history
of a thousand minute points, without which our Greek knowledge would be
gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent in everything but their wish
to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book after book,
passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a collection of
fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the works of some
great man, find that they have been put off with a vile counterfeit got up
at second hand. If we compare the theories of Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and
others, we shall feel better satisfied of the utter uncertainty of
criticism than of the apocryphal position of Homer. One rejects what
another considers the turning-point of his theory. One cuts a supposed
knot by expunging what another would explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon as a
literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill, seems to
revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies attributed to Seneca
are by _four_ different authors.(34) Now, I will venture to assert, that
these tragedies are so uniform, not only in their borrowed phraseology--a
phraseology with which writers like Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were
more charmed than ourselves--in their freedom from real poetry, and last,
but not least, in an ultra-refined and consistent abandonment of good
taste, that few writers of the present day would question the capabilities
of the same gentleman, be he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but
a great many more equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin
astonished the world with the startling announcement that the Ãneid of
Virgil, and the satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without
wishing to say one word of disrespect against the industry and
learning--nay, the refined acuteness--which scholars, like Wolf, have
bestowed upon this subject, I must express my fears, that many of our
modern Homeric theories will become matter for the surprise and
entertainment, rather than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help
thinking, that the literary history of more recent times will account for
many points of difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to
a period so remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus were
of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason why
corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in his
day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should have
given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after all, the
main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand too great a
sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully appeals, and
which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has sought to rob
us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much violence to that
inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with love and admiration
for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author of the Iliad a mere
compiler, is to degrade the powers of human invention; to elevate
analytical judgment at the expense of the most ennobling impulses of the
soul; and to forget the ocean in the contemplation of a polypus. There is
a catholicity, so to speak, in the very name of Homer. Our faith in the
author of the Iliad may be a mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us
a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in believing
in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers round the bed
of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth of imagination
which a host of imitators could not exhaust,--still I am far from wishing
to deny that the author of these great poems found a rich fund of
tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from whence he might derive
both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to _use_ existing
romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to patch up the poem
itself from such materials. What consistency of style and execution can be
hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what bad taste and tedium will
not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other bards,
are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In fact, the
most original writer is still drawing upon outward impressions--nay, even
his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents which support and feed the
impulses of imagination. But unless there be some grand pervading
principle--some invisible, yet most distinctly stamped archetypus of the
great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never come to the birth. Traditions
the most picturesque, episodes the most pathetic, local associations
teeming with the thoughts of gods and great men, may crowd in one mighty
vision, or reveal themselves in more substantial forms to the mind of the
poet; but, except the power to create a grand whole, to which these shall
be but as details and embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but
a scrap-book, a parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each
other in their wild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters,
which will require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware as
I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief, it
still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved for a
higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature intended
to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which the
greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were faith no
virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our ignorance on any
matter. But we are too well taught the contrary lesson; and it seems as
though our faith should be especially tried touching the men and the
events which have wrought most influence upon the condition of humanity.
And there is a kind of sacredness attached to the memory of the great and
the good, which seems to bid us repulse the scepticism which would
allegorize their existence into a pleasing apologue, and measure the
giants of intellect by an homeopathic dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply wrapped
in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots which mere
analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must transform
ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination must fight over
the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the same sense of injury,
as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but attain this degree of
enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely suffice for the reading of
Homer), we shall feel that the poems of Homer are not only the work of one
writer, but of the greatest writer that ever touched the hearts of men by
the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems their
powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who is
evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely observes:--


    "It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No
    poet has ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his
    countrymen. Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the
    character of other nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that
    of the Greeks. This is a feature in their character which was not
    wholly erased even in the period of their degeneracy. When
    lawgivers and sages appeared in Greece, the work of the poet had
    already been accomplished; and they paid homage to his superior
    genius. He held up before his nation the mirror, in which they
    were to behold the world of gods and heroes no less than of feeble
    mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity and truth. His
    poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature; on the
    love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
    outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured
    forth from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of
    man; and therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every
    breast which cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to
    his immortal spirit, from another heaven than any of which he
    dreamed on earth, to look down on his race, to see the nations
    from the fields of Asia to the forests of Hercynia, performing
    pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic wand caused to flow;
    if it is permitted to him to view the vast assemblage of grand, of
    elevated, of glorious productions, which had been called into
    being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal spirit may
    reside, this alone would suffice to complete his happiness."(35)


Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the "Apotheosis of
Homer"(36) is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association,
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds, is
lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more we
read, and the more we think--think as becomes the readers of Homer,--the
more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry gave us this
rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the means of its
preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury of taste and
eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it a mere centre
around which to drive a series of theories, whose wildness is only
equalled by their inconsistency with each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope's translation, I will content myself with a brief account
of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer who has done
it full justice(37):--


    "This poem," says Coleridge, "is a short mock-heroic of ancient
    date. The text varies in different editions, and is obviously
    disturbed and corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to
    have been a juvenile essay of Homer's genius; others have
    attributed it to the same Pigrees, mentioned above, and whose
    reputation for humour seems to have invited the appropriation of
    any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was uncertain; so
    little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies, know or
    care about that department of criticism employed in determining
    the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being
    a youthful prolusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that
    from the beginning to the end it is a plain and palpable parody,
    not only of the general spirit, but of the numerous passages of
    the Iliad itself; and even, if no such intention to parody were
    discernible in it, the objection would still remain, that to
    suppose a work of mere burlesque to be the primary effort of
    poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse that order in the
    development of national taste, which the history of every other
    people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost ascertained to
    be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society much more
    refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that any
    popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
    contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
    other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see,
    with as much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe
    that none of them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the
    usage of the word deltos, "writing tablet," instead of diphthera,
    "skin," which, according to Herod. 5, 58, was the material
    employed by the Asiatic Greeks for that purpose, that this poem
    was another offspring of Attic ingenuity; and generally that the
    familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a strong argument against
    so ancient a date for its composition."


Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope's design,
I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation, and on my own
purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby. It
is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his whole
work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes, which
prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical attainments
were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it is probable that
these examinations were the result rather of the contradictory versions
already existing, than of a desire to make a perfect transcript of the
original. And in those days, what is called literal translation was less
cultivated than at present. If something like the general sense could be
decorated with the easy gracefulness of a practised poet; if the charms of
metrical cadence and a pleasing fluency could be made consistent with a
fair interpretation of the poet's meaning, his _words_ were less jealously
sought for, and those who could read so good a poem as Pope's Iliad had
fair reason to be satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope's translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at it
as a most delightful work in itself,--a work which is as much a part of
English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn from
our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
amphikupellon being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from us
to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman's fine,
bold, rough old English;--far be it from, us to hold up his translation as
what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still dismiss Pope's
Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the consciousness that they must
have read a very great number of books before they have read its fellow.

As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up without
pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general reader. Having
some little time since translated all the works of Homer for another
publisher, I might have brought a large amount of accumulated matter,
sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the text. But Pope's
version was no field for such a display; and my purpose was to touch
briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions, to notice occasionally
_some_ departures from the original, and to give a few parallel passages
from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter task I cannot pretend to
novelty, but I trust that my other annotations, while utterly disclaiming
high scholastic views, will be found to convey as much as is wanted; at
least, as far as the necessary limits of these volumes could be expected
to admit. To write a commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I
have made Pope's translation a little more entertaining and instructive to
a mass of miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

                                                   THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.

_Christ Church._





POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER


Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with
him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular excellences;
but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a wonder if he has
ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most excelled in that
which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the invention that, in
different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses: the utmost stretch of
human study, learning, and industry, which masters everything besides, can
never attain to this. It furnishes art with all her materials, and without
it judgment itself can at best but "steal wisely:" for art is only like a
prudent steward that lives on managing the riches of nature. Whatever
praises may be given to works of judgment, there is not even a single
beauty in them to which the invention must not contribute: as in the most
regular gardens, art can only reduce beauties of nature to more
regularity, and such a figure, which the common eye may better take in,
and is, therefore, more entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why
common critics are inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to
a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves
to pursue their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art,
than to comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.

Our author's work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the
beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the
number of them is infinitely greater. It is like a copious nursery, which
contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of which those
who followed him have but selected some particular plants, each according
to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things are too luxuriant
it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if others are not arrived to
perfection or maturity, it is only because they are overrun and oppressed
by those of a stronger nature.

It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute that
unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no man of
a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him. What he
writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing moves, every
thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called, or a battle
fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said or done as from a
third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by the force of the
poet's imagination, and turns in one place to a hearer, in another to a
spectator. The course of his verses resembles that of the army he
describes,

  Hoid' ar' isan hosei te puri chthon pasa nemoito.

"They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it." It
is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous, is
not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its fullest
splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and others, and
becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity. Exact
disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers, may have
been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this "vivida vis animi,"
in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect or neglected,
this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even while we disapprove.
Nay, where this appears, though attended with absurdities, it brightens
all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing but its own splendour. This
fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned as through a glass, reflected
from Homer, more shining than fierce, but everywhere equal and constant:
in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in sudden, short, and interrupted
flashes: In Milton it glows like a furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour
by the force of art: in Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an
accidental fire from heaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns
everywhere clearly and everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in a
manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent parts
of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which
distinguishes him from all other authors.

This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed not
enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole compass of
nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward passions and
affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all the outward
forms and images of things for his descriptions: but wanting yet an ampler
sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and boundless walk for his
imagination, and created a world for himself in the invention of fable.
That which Aristotle calls "the soul of poetry," was first breathed into
it by Homer, I shall begin with considering him in his part, as it is
naturally the first; and I speak of it both as it means the design of a
poem, and as it is taken for fiction.

Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, though
they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature; or of such
as, though they did, became fables by the additional episodes and manner
of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of an epic poem, "The
return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in Italy," or the like.
That of the Iliad is the "anger of Achilles," the most short and single
subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet this he has supplied with a
vaster variety of incidents and events, and crowded with a greater number
of councils, speeches, battles, and episodes of all kinds, than are to be
found even in those poems whose schemes are of the utmost latitude and
irregularity. The action is hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and
its whole duration employs not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for want of
so warm a genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as
well as a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both
Homer's poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his.
The other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it
so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of
action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time. Nor is
it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his
invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of story.
If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up their
forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus, Virgil
has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them) destroys
the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses visit the
shades, the Ãneas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent after him. If he
be detained from his return by the allurements of Calypso, so is Ãneas by
Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be absent from the army on the
score of a quarrel through half the poem, Rinaldo must absent himself just
as long on the like account. If he gives his hero a suit of celestial
armour, Virgil and Tasso make the same present to theirs. Virgil has not
only observed this close imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the
way, supplied the want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon,
and the taking of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word
from Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Ãneas are taken from those of
Medea and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.

To proceed to the allegorical fable--If we reflect upon those innumerable
knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy which Homer is
generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories, what a new and
ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us! How fertile will
that imagination appear, which as able to clothe all the properties of
elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues and vices, in forms
and persons, and to introduce them into actions agreeable to the nature of
the things they shadowed! This is a field in which no succeeding poets
could dispute with Homer, and whatever commendations have been allowed
them on this head, are by no means for their invention in having enlarged
his circle, but for their judgment in having contracted it. For when the
mode of learning changed in the following ages, and science was delivered
in a plainer manner, it then became as reasonable in the more modern poets
to lay it aside, as it was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was
no unhappy circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that
demand upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing
all those allegorical parts of a poem.

The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the
machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the
deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece, he seems the
first who brought them into a system of machinery for poetry, and such a
one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: for we find those
authors who have been offended at the literal notion of the gods,
constantly laying their accusation against Homer as the chief support of
it. But whatever cause there might be to blame his machines in a
philosophical or religious view, they are so perfect in the poetic, that
mankind have been ever since contented to follow them: none have been able
to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the limits he has set: every
attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all the various
changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this day the gods of
poetry.

We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no
author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a variety,
or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them. Every one has
something so singularly his own, that no painter could have distinguished
them more by their features, than the poet has by their manners. Nothing
can be more exact than the distinctions he has observed in the different
degrees of virtues and vices. The single quality of courage is wonderfully
diversified in the several characters of the Iliad. That of Achilles is
furious and intractable; that of Diomede forward, yet listening to advice,
and subject to command; that of Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of
Hector, active and vigilant: the courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by
love of empire and ambition; that of Menelaus mixed with softness and
tenderness for his people: we find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in
Sarpedon a gallant and generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing
diversity to be found only in the principal quality which constitutes the
main of each character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he
takes care to give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main
characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct
in this, that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other
natural, open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage;
and this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference
of his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner;
they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, where they
are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to those of Homer.
His characters of valour are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way
peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and we see nothing that
differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of Sergestus, Cloanthus, or
the rest, In like manner it may be remarked of Statius's heroes, that an
air of impetuosity runs through them all; the same horrid and savage
courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, &c. They have a
parity of character, which makes them seem brothers of one family. I
believe when the reader is led into this tract of reflection, if he will
pursue it through the epic and tragic writers, he will be convinced how
infinitely superior, in this point, the invention of Homer was to that of
all others.

The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters; being
perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners, of those
who utter them. As there is more variety of characters in the Iliad, so
there is of speeches, than in any other poem. "Everything in it has
manner" (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is acted or
spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how small a
number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil the dramatic part is
less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches often consist of
general reflections or thoughts, which might be equally just in any
person's mouth upon the same occasion. As many of his persons have no
apparent characters, so many of his speeches escape being applied and
judged by the rule of propriety. We oftener think of the author himself
when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in Homer, all which are the
effects of a colder invention, that interests us less in the action
described. Homer makes us hearers, and Virgil leaves us readers.

If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same
presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his thoughts.
Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part Homer principally
excelled. What were alone sufficient to prove the grandeur and excellence
of his sentiments in general, is, that they have so remarkable a parity
with those of the Scripture. Duport, in his Gnomologia Homerica, has
collected innumerable instances of this sort. And it is with justice an
excellent modern writer allows, that if Virgil has not so many thoughts
that are low and vulgar, he has not so many that are sublime and noble;
and that the Roman author seldom rises into very astonishing sentiments
where he is not fired by the Iliad.

If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the
invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast
comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance of
art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and
fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various views
presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions taken off to
perfection at a heat? Nay, he not only gives us the full prospects of
things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side views, unobserved by
any painter but Homer. Nothing is so surprising as the descriptions of his
battles, which take up no less than half the Iliad, and are supplied with
so vast a variety of incidents, that no one bears a likeness to another;
such different kinds of deaths, that no two heroes are wounded in the same
manner, and such a profusion of noble ideas, that every battle rises above
the last in greatness, horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not
near that number of images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every
one has assisted himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is
evident of Virgil especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are
not drawn from his master.

If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright imagination
of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We acknowledge him
the father of poetical diction; the first who taught that "language of the
gods" to men. His expression is like the colouring of some great masters,
which discovers itself to be laid on boldly, and executed with rapidity.
It is, indeed, the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with
the greatest spirit. Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who
had found out "living words;" there are in him more daring figures and
metaphors than in any good author whatever. An arrow is "impatient" to be
on the wing, a weapon "thirsts" to drink the blood of an enemy, and the
like, yet his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great
in proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the same
degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter, as that
is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass in the
furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a greater
clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the heat more
intense.

To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected the
compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper to
poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted and
filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise conduced in
some measure to thicken the images. On this last consideration I cannot
but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of his invention, since (as
he has managed them) they are a sort of supernumerary pictures of the
persons or things to which they were joined. We see the motion of Hector's
plumes in the epithet Korythaiolos, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that
of Einosiphyllos, and so of others, which particular images could not have
been insisted upon so long as to express them in a description (though but
of a single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets
is a short description.

Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not satisfied
with his language as he found it settled in any one part of Greece, but
searched through its different dialects with this particular view, to
beautify and perfect his numbers he considered these as they had a greater
mixture of vowels or consonants, and accordingly employed them as the
verse required either a greater smoothness or strength. What he most
affected was the Ionic, which has a peculiar sweetness, from its never
using contractions, and from its custom of resolving the diphthongs into
two syllables, so as to make the words open themselves with a more
spreading and sonorous fluency. With this he mingled the Attic
contractions, the broader Doric, and the feebler Ãolic, which often
rejects its aspirate, or takes off its accent, and completed this variety
by altering some letters with the licence of poetry. Thus his measures,
instead of being fetters to his sense, were always in readiness to run
along with the warmth of his rapture, and even to give a further
representation of his notions, in the correspondence of their sounds to
what they signified. Out of all these he has derived that harmony which
makes us confess he had not only the richest head, but the finest ear in
the world. This is so great a truth, that whoever will but consult the
tune of his verses, even without understanding them (with the same sort of
diligence as we daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will
find more sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other
language of poetry. The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the critics to
be copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just as to
ascribe it to the nature of the Latin tongue: indeed the Greek has some
advantages both from the natural sound of its words, and the turn and
cadence of its verse, which agree with the genius of no other language.
Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the utmost diligence in working
up a more intractable language to whatsoever graces it was capable of,
and, in particular, never failed to bring the sound of his line to a
beautiful agreement with its sense. If the Grecian poet has not been so
frequently celebrated on this account as the Roman, the only reason is,
that fewer critics have understood one language than the other. Dionysius
of Halicarnassus has pointed out many of our author's beauties in this
kind, in his treatise of the Composition of Words. It suffices at present
to observe of his numbers, that they flow with so much ease, as to make
one imagine Homer had no other care than to transcribe as fast as the
Muses dictated, and, at the same time, with so much force and inspiriting
vigour, that they awaken and raise us like the sound of a trumpet. They
roll along as a plentiful river, always in motion, and always full; while
we are borne away by a tide of verse, the most rapid, and yet the most
smooth imaginable.

Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us is
his invention. It is that which forms the character of each part of his
work; and accordingly we find it to have made his fable more extensive and
copious than any other, his manners more lively and strongly marked, his
speeches more affecting and transported, his sentiments more warm and
sublime, his images and descriptions more full and animated, his
expression more raised and daring, and his numbers more rapid and various.
I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with regard to any of these
heads, I have no way derogated from his character. Nothing is more absurd
or endless, than the common method of comparing eminent writers by an
opposition of particular passages in them, and forming a judgment from
thence of their merit upon the whole. We ought to have a certain knowledge
of the principal character and distinguishing excellence of each: it is in
that we are to consider him, and in proportion to his degree in that we
are to admire him. No author or man ever excelled all the world in more
than one faculty; and as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in
judgment. Not that we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because
Virgil had it in a more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention,
because Homer possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authors
had more of both than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have
less in comparison with one another. Homer was the greater genius, Virgil
the better artist. In one we most admire the man, in the other the work.
Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgil
leads us with an attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generous
profusion; Virgil bestows with a careful magnificence; Homer, like the
Nile, pours out his riches with a boundless overflow; Virgil, like a river
in its banks, with a gentle and constant stream. When we behold their
battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes they celebrate. Homer,
boundless and resistless as Achilles, bears all before him, and shines
more and more as the tumult increases; Virgil, calmly daring, like Ãneas,
appears undisturbed in the midst of the action; disposes all about him,
and conquers with tranquillity. And when we look upon their machines,
Homer seems like his own Jupiter in his terrors, shaking Olympus,
scattering the lightnings, and firing the heavens: Virgil, like the same
power in his benevolence, counselling with the gods, laying plans for
empires, and regularly ordering his whole creation.

But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues, they
naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to distinguish
exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. As prudence may
sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness;
and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance, so may a great
invention to redundancy or wildness. If we look upon Homer in this view,
we shall perceive the chief objections against him to proceed from so
noble a cause as the excess of this faculty.

Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which so
much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with
gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength, exceed
what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become miracles
in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit something near
extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable performances.
Thus Homer has his "speaking horses;" and Virgil his "myrtles distilling
blood;" where the latter has not so much as contrived the easy
intervention of a deity to save the probability.

It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been thought
too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this faculty is seen
in nothing more, than in its inability to confine itself to that single
circumstance upon which the comparison is grounded: it runs out into
embellishments of additional images, which, however, are so managed as not
to overpower the main one. His similes are like pictures, where the
principal figure has not only its proportion given agreeable to the
original, but is also set off with occasional ornaments and prospects. The
same will account for his manner of heaping a number of comparisons
together in one breath, when his fancy suggested to him at once so many
various and correspondent images. The reader will easily extend this
observation to more objections of the same kind.

If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or
narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will be
found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the times he
lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the gods; and the
vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here speak a word
of the latter, as it is a point generally carried into extremes, both by
the censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be a strange partiality to
antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier,(38) "that those times and manners
are so much the more excellent, as they are more contrary to ours." Who
can be so prejudiced in their favour as to magnify the felicity of those
ages, when a spirit of revenge and cruelty, joined with the practice of
rapine and robbery, reigned through the world: when no mercy was shown but
for the sake of lucre; when the greatest princes were put to the sword,
and their wives and daughters made slaves and concubines? On the other
side, I would not be so delicate as those modern critics, who are shocked
at the servile offices and mean employments in which we sometimes see the
heroes of Homer engaged. There is a pleasure in taking a view of that
simplicity, in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding
monarchs without their guards; princes tending their flocks, and
princesses drawing water from the springs. When we read Homer, we ought to
reflect that we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world;
and those who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in
the perusal of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with
nations and people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost
three thousand years back into the remotest antiquity, and entertaining
themselves with a clear and surprising vision of things nowhere else to be
found, the only true mirror of that ancient world. By this means alone
their greatest obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates their
dislike, will become a satisfaction.

This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of the
same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the "far-darting Phoebus,"
the "blue-eyed Pallas," the "swift-footed Achilles," &c., which some have
censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated. Those of the gods
depended upon the powers and offices then believed to belong to them; and
had contracted a weight and veneration from the rites and solemn devotions
in which they were used: they were a sort of attributes with which it was
a matter of religion to salute them on all occasions, and which it was an
irreverence to omit. As for the epithets of great men, Mons. Boileau is of
opinion, that they were in the nature of surnames, and repeated as such;
for the Greeks having no names derived from their fathers, were obliged to
add some other distinction of each person; either naming his parents
expressly, or his place of birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander
the son of Philip, Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c.
Homer, therefore, complying with the custom of his country, used such
distinctive additions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have
something parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince, &c.
If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for the
repetition, I shall add a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing the world
into its different ages, has placed a fourth age, between the brazen and
the iron one, of "heroes distinct from other men; a divine race who fought
at Thebes and Troy, are called demi-gods, and live by the care of Jupiter
in the islands of the blessed." Now among the divine honours which were
paid them, they might have this also in common with the gods, not to be
mentioned without the solemnity of an epithet, and such as might be
acceptable to them by celebrating their families, actions or qualities.

What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as hardly
deserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the
course of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudicious endeavour
to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should think to raise
the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one would imagine, by
the whole course of their parallels, that these critics never so much as
heard of Homer's having written first; a consideration which whoever
compares these two poets ought to have always in his eye. Some accuse him
for the same things which they overlook or praise in the other; as when
they prefer the fable and moral of the Ãneis to those of the Iliad, for
the same reasons which might set the Odyssey above the Ãneis; as that the
hero is a wiser man, and the action of the one more beneficial to his
country than that of the other; or else they blame him for not doing what
he never designed; as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince
as Ãneas, when the very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thus that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others
select those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as
some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of
Scaliger in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and
mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement,
oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph
in the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to a
fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer, and
that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the great
reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his times,
and the prejudice of those that followed: and in pursuance of this
principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of the
cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality the
consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or
any great author whose general character will infallibly raise many casual
additions to their reputation. This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who
yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age Homer had lived, he must
have been the greatest poet of his nation, and that he may be said in his
sense to be the master even of those who surpassed him.(39)

In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to the
honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed the
characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his followers, he
still continues superior to them. A cooler judgment may commit fewer
faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of critics: but that
warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most universal applauses which
holds the heart of a reader under the strongest enchantment. Homer not
only appears the inventor of poetry, but excels all the inventors of other
arts, in this, that he has swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded
him. What he has done admitted no increase, it only left room for
contraction or regulation. He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and
if he has failed in some of his flights, it was but because he attempted
everything. A work of this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from
the most vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and
produces the finest fruit: nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure
and profit join to make it valuable: and they who find the justest faults,
have only said that a few branches which run luxuriant through a richness
of nature, might be lopped into form to give it a more regular appearance.

Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it remains
to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief
characteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem, such
as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice it but
by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in every
particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too much
softens those, takes off from this chief character. It is the first grand
duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and unmaimed; and for the
rest, the diction and versification only are his proper province, since
these must be his own, but the others he is to take as he finds them.

It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in
our language for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no
literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior
language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that a
rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no less
in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the modern
manners of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, there is often a
light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a version almost
literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but those which are
necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original, and supporting the
poetical style of the translation: and I will venture to say, there have
not been more men misled in former times by a servile, dull adherence to
the letter, than have been deluded in ours by a chimerical, insolent hope
of raising and improving their author. It is not to be doubted, that the
fire of the poem is what a translator should principally regard, as it is
most likely to expire in his managing: however, it is his safest way to be
content with preserving this to his utmost in the whole, without
endeavouring to be more than he finds his author is, in any particular
place. It is a great secret in writing, to know when to be plain, and when
poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will
but follow modestly in his footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty,
let us raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we
ought not to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the
censure of a mere English critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to
have been more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some of
his translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of the
sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion of
simplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some
sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the certain
signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in his train,
while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an unaffected and
equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes one could sooner
pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be envied for such
commendations, as he may gain by that character of style, which his
friends must agree together to call simplicity, and the rest of the world
will call dulness. There is a graceful and dignified simplicity, as well
as a bold and sordid one; which differ as much from each other as the air
of a plain man from that of a sloven: it is one thing to be tricked up,
and another not to be dressed at all. Simplicity is the mean between
ostentation and rusticity.

This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the
Scripture and our author. One may affirm, with all respect to the inspired
writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words but what were
intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that part of the
world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his style must of
course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books than that of any
other writer. This consideration (together with what has been observed of
the parity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks, induce a translator, on
the one hand, to give in to several of those general phrases and manners
of expression, which have attained a veneration even in our language from
being used in the Old Testament; as, on the other, to avoid those which
have been appropriated to the Divinity, and in a manner consigned to
mystery and religion.

For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care
should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and
proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet. They have
something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned gravity
and shortness with which they are delivered: a grace which would be
utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a more ingenious
(that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase.

Perhaps the mixture of some Graecisms and old words after the manner of
Milton, if done without too much affectation, might not have an ill effect
in a version of this particular work, which most of any other seems to
require a venerable, antique cast. But certainly the use of modern terms
of war and government, such as "platoon, campaign, junto," or the like,
(into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be allowable;
those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat the subjects
in any living language.

There are two peculiarities in Homer's diction, which are a sort of marks
or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first sight; those
who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as defects, and those who
are, seemed pleased with them as beauties. I speak of his compound
epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the former cannot be done
literally into English without destroying the purity of our language. I
believe such should be retained as slide easily of themselves into an
English compound, without violence to the ear or to the received rules of
composition, as well as those which have received a sanction from the
authority of our best poets, and are become familiar through their use of
them; such as "the cloud-compelling Jove," &c. As for the rest, whenever
any can be as fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a
compounded one, the course to be taken is obvious.

Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image by one or
two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as the epithet
einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculous translated
literally "leaf-shaking," but affords a majestic idea in the periphrasis:
"the lofty mountain shakes his waving woods." Others that admit of
different significations, may receive an advantage from a judicious
variation, according to the occasions on which they are introduced. For
example, the epithet of Apollo, hekaebolos or "far-shooting," is capable
of two explications; one literal, in respect of the darts and bow, the
ensigns of that god; the other allegorical, with regard to the rays of the
sun; therefore, in such places where Apollo is represented as a god in
person, I would use the former interpretation; and where the effects of
the sun are described, I would make choice of the latter. Upon the whole,
it will be necessary to avoid that perpetual repetition of the same
epithets which we find in Homer, and which, though it might be
accommodated (as has been already shown) to the ear of those times, is by
no means so to ours: but one may wait for opportunities of placing them,
where they derive an additional beauty from the occasions on which they
are employed; and in doing this properly, a translator may at once show
his fancy and his judgment.

As for Homer's repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whole
narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or
hemistitch. I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these, as
neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor to
offend the reader too much on the other. The repetition is not ungraceful
in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders it a sort of
insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods to men, or from
higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or where the ceremonial
of religion seems to require it, in the solemn forms of prayers, oaths, or
the like. In other cases, I believe the best rule is, to be guided by the
nearness, or distance, at which the repetitions are placed in the
original: when they follow too close, one may vary the expression; but it
is a question, whether a professed translator be authorized to omit any:
if they be tedious, the author is to answer for it.

It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer (as has been said) is
perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every new
subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of poetry, and
attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it in the Greek,
and Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what may sometimes happen by
chance, when a writer is warm, and fully possessed of his image: however,
it may reasonably be believed they designed this, in whose verse it so
manifestly appears in a superior degree to all others. Few readers have
the ear to be judges of it: but those who have, will see I have
endeavoured at this beauty.

Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice
to Homer. I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may entertain
without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him than any
entire translation in verse has yet done. We have only those of Chapman,
Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasurable
length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce any paraphrase
more loose and rambling than his. He has frequent interpolations of four
or six lines; and I remember one in the thirteenth book of the Odyssey,
ver. 312, where he has spun twenty verses out of two. He is often mistaken
in so bold a manner, that one might think he deviated on purpose, if he
did not in other places of his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles.
He appears to have had a strong affectation of extracting new meanings out
of his author; insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of
the mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to
strain the obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in
fustian; a fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as
in the tragedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man
may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface
and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in
poetry. His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than
fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which
is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for
particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits
the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt
not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimes omits whole similes and
sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of
his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness. His poetry, as
well as Ogilby's, is too mean for criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small part
of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the
sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much regard
to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed
him in passages where he wanders from the original. However, had he
translated the whole work, I would no more have attempted Homer after him
than Virgil: his version of whom (notwithstanding some human errors) is
the most noble and spirited translation I know in any language. But the
fate of great geniuses is like that of great ministers: though they are
confessedly the first in the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied
and calumniated only for being at the head of it.

That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who
translates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and fire
which makes his chief character: in particular places, where the sense can
bear any doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, as most
agreeing with that character; to copy him in all the variations of his
style, and the different modulations of his numbers; to preserve, in the
more active or descriptive parts, a warmth and elevation; in the more
sedate or narrative, a plainness and solemnity; in the speeches, a fulness
and perspicuity; in the sentences, a shortness and gravity; not to neglect
even the little figures and turns on the words, nor sometimes the very
cast of the periods; neither to omit nor confound any rites or customs of
antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include the whole in a shorter compass
than has hitherto been done by any translator who has tolerably preserved
either the sense or poetry. What I would further recommend to him is, to
study his author rather from his own text, than from any commentaries, how
learned soever, or whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the
world; to consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the
ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these, the
Archbishop of Cambray's Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the
spirit and turn of our author; and Bossu's admirable Treatise of the Epic
Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all, with
whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever happiness
he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few; those only
who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning. For to satisfy
such a want either, is not in the nature of this undertaking; since a mere
modern wit can like nothing that is not modern, and a pedant nothing that
is not Greek.

What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am
prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets,
who are most sensible of the weight of this task. As for the worst,
whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as they
are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I was guided in
this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and by persons
for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be true, that
the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men of wit. Mr.
Addison was the first whose advice determined me to undertake this task;
who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion in such terms as I
cannot repeat without vanity. I was obliged to Sir Richard Steele for a
very early recommendation of my undertaking to the public. Dr. Swift
promoted my interest with that warmth with which he always serves his
friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel Garth are what I never
knew wanting on any occasion. I must also acknowledge, with infinite
pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well as sincere criticisms, of Mr.
Congreve, who had led me the way in translating some parts of Homer. I
must add the names of Mr. Rowe, and Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a
further opportunity of doing justice to the last, whose good nature (to
give it a great panegyric), is no less extensive than his learning. The
favour of these gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them
so true an affection. But what can I say of the honour so many of the
great have done me; while the first names of the age appear as my
subscribers, and the most distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning
as my chief encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to
find, that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not displeased
I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his excellent
Essay), so complete a praise:

  "Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
  For all books else appear so mean, so poor,
  Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read,
  And Homer will be all the books you need."

That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it is
hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing to
his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord Bolingbroke,
not more distinguished in the great scenes of business, than in all the
useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not refused to be the
critic of these sheets, and the patron of their writer: and that the noble
author of the tragedy of "Heroic Love" has continued his partiality to me,
from my writing pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself
the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their
advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several
particulars of this translation.

I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my desire
of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair. The
particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave
me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his friendship. I must
attribute to the same motive that of several others of my friends: to whom
all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by the privileges of a
familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can no way better oblige men
of their turn than by my silence.

In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would have
thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that has been
shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I can hardly
envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when I reflect on
the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy friendships,
which make the satisfaction of life. This distinction is the more to be
acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never gratified the
prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of particular men.
Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of an undertaking in
which I have experienced the candour and friendship of so many persons of
merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those years of youth that are
generally lost in a circle of follies, after a manner neither wholly
unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself.






THE ILIAD.





BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.(40)

THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.

In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseis and Briseis,
allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles. Chryses, the
father of Chryseis, and priest of Apollo, comes to the Grecian camp to
ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in the tenth year of
the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently dismissed by
Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who inflicts a pestilence
on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and encourages Chalcas to declare
the cause of it; who attributes it to the refusal of Chryseis. The king,
being obliged to send back his captive, enters into a furious contest with
Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however, as he had the absolute command
of the army, he seizes on Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent
withdraws himself and his forces from the rest of the Greeks; and
complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of
the wrong done to her son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter,
granting her suit, incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till
they are reconciled by the address of Vulcan.

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the
plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for
Jupiter's stay with the Ãthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her
petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and
lastly to Olympus.

  Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
  Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
  That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
  The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
  Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
  Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.(41)
  Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
  Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!(42)

  Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour(43)
  Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
  Latona's son a dire contagion spread,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his reverent priest defied,(45)
  And for the king's offence the people died.

  For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
  His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
  Suppliant the venerable father stands;
  Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
  By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
  Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
  He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race(46)

  "Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
  May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
  Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
  But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
  And give Chryseis to these arms again;
  If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
  And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."

  The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
  Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
  Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:

  "Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
  Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
  Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
  Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
  Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
  And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
  Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
  And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
  In daily labours of the loom employ'd,
  Or doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
  Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
  Far from her native soil and weeping sire."

                 [Illustration: HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.]

                         HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.


  The trembling priest along the shore return'd,
  And in the anguish of a father mourn'd.
  Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
  Silent he wander'd by the sounding main;
  Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
  The god who darts around the world his rays.

  "O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's line,(47)
  Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,(48)
  Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
  And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shores.
  If e'er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,(49)
  Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
  God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
  Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy."

  Thus Chryses pray'd.--the favouring power attends,
  And from Olympus' lofty tops descends.
  Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;(50)
  Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
  Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
  And gloomy darkness roll'd about his head.
  The fleet in view, he twang'd his deadly bow,
  And hissing fly the feather'd fates below.
  On mules and dogs the infection first began;(51)
  And last, the vengeful arrows fix'd in man.
  For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
  The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
  But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
  Inspired by Juno, Thetis' godlike son
  Convened to council all the Grecian train;
  For much the goddess mourn'd her heroes slain.(52)
  The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
  Achilles thus the king of men address'd:

  "Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
  And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
  The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
  'Tis time to save the few remains of war.
  But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
  Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage;
  Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
  By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.(53)
  If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
  Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
  So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
  And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."

  He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
  Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
  That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
  The past, the present, and the future knew:
  Uprising slow, the venerable sage
  Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

  "Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
  Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
  First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
  Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
  For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
  And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
  Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
  Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
  For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
  'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
  To whom Pelides:--"From thy inmost soul
  Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
  E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
  To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
  And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
  Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
  No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
  Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
  Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
  The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."

  Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
  "Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
  But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
  Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
  Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
  But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
  Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
  To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.(54)
  Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
  The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."

  The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
  The monarch started from his shining throne;
  Black choler fill'd his breast that boil'd with ire,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living fire:
  "Augur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
  Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
  Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
  And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
  For this are Phoebus' oracles explored,
  To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
  For this with falsehood is my honour stain'd,
  Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
  Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
  And heavenly charms prefer to proffer'd gold?
  A maid, unmatch'd in manners as in face,
  Skill'd in each art, and crown'd with every grace;
  Not half so dear were Clytaemnestra's charms,
  When first her blooming beauties bless'd my arms.
  Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
  Our cares are only for the public weal:
  Let me be deem'd the hateful cause of all,
  And suffer, rather than my people fall.
  The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
  So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
  But since for common good I yield the fair,
  My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
  Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
  That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
  "Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
  Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
  Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
  The due reward of many a well-fought field?

  The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
  We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
  But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
  (That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
  Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
  The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
  Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
  Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."

  Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
  With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
  Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
  Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
  At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
  First let the just equivalent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and let it be
  A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
  Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
  This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
  The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;(55)
  Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
  The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
  And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
  But this when time requires.--It now remains
  We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
  And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
  With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
  Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
  And some deputed prince the charge attend:
  This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
  Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
  Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
  Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
  Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
  The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

                          [Illustration: MARS.]

                                  MARS.


  At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
  "O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
  Inglorious slave to interest, ever join'd
  With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
  What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
  Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
  What cause have I to war at thy decree?
  The distant Trojans never injured me;
  To Phthia's realms no hostile troops they led:
  Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
  Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
  And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
  Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
  Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
  Hither we sail'd, a voluntary throng,
  To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
  What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
  But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother's cause?
  Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
  Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
  And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,
  Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
  A prize as small, O tyrant! match'd with thine,
  As thy own actions if compared to mine.
  Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,
  Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
  Some trivial present to my ships I bear:
  Or barren praises pay the wounds of war.
  But know, proud monarch, I'm thy slave no more;
  My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia's shore:
  Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain,
  What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?"

  To this the king: "Fly, mighty warrior! fly;
  Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
  There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight,
  And Jove himself shall guard a monarch's right.
  Of all the kings (the god's distinguish'd care)
  To power superior none such hatred bear:
  Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,
  And wars and horrors are thy savage joy,
  If thou hast strength, 'twas Heaven that strength bestow'd;
  For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
  Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away;
  Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;
  I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
  Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
  Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:--but here(56)
  'Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
  Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
  My bark shall waft her to her native land;
  But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,
  Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair:
  Even in thy tent I'll seize the blooming prize,
  Thy loved Briseis with the radiant eyes.
  Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour
  Thou stood'st a rival of imperial power;
  And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known,
  That kings are subject to the gods alone."

  Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppress'd,
  His heart swell'd high, and labour'd in his breast;
  Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;
  Now fired by wrath, and now by reason cool'd:
  That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,
  Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;
  This whispers soft his vengeance to control,
  And calm the rising tempest of his soul.
  Just as in anguish of suspense he stay'd,
  While half unsheathed appear'd the glittering blade,(57)
  Minerva swift descended from above,
  Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove
  (For both the princes claim'd her equal care);
  Behind she stood, and by the golden hair
  Achilles seized; to him alone confess'd;
  A sable cloud conceal'd her from the rest.
  He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,
  Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes:

         [Illustration: MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.]

                 MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.


  "Descends Minerva, in her guardian care,
  A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear
  From Atreus' son?--Then let those eyes that view
  The daring crime, behold the vengeance too."

  "Forbear (the progeny of Jove replies)
  To calm thy fury I forsake the skies:
  Let great Achilles, to the gods resign'd,
  To reason yield the empire o'er his mind.
  By awful Juno this command is given;
  The king and you are both the care of heaven.
  The force of keen reproaches let him feel;
  But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
  For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)
  Thy injured honour has its fated hour,
  When the proud monarch shall thy arms implores
  And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
  Then let revenge no longer bear the sway;
  Command thy passions, and the gods obey."

  To her Pelides:--"With regardful ear,
  'Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.
  Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress:
  Those who revere the gods the gods will bless."
  He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
  Then in the sheath return'd the shining blade.
  The goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
  And joins the sacred senate of the skies.

  Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
  Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
  "O monster! mix'd of insolence and fear,
  Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
  When wert thou known in ambush'd fights to dare,
  Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
  'Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
  Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
  So much 'tis safer through the camp to go,
  And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
  Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
  Sent in Jove's anger on a slavish race;
  Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
  Are tamed to wrongs;--or this had been thy last.
  Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
  Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
  Which sever'd from the trunk (as I from thee)
  On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
  This sceptre, form'd by temper'd steel to prove
  An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
  From whom the power of laws and justice springs
  (Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
  By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
  Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
  When, flush'd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
  The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
  Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
  Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
  Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
  This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe."

  He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
  His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
  Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
  The raging king return'd his frowns again.

  To calm their passion with the words of age,
  Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
  Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
  Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:(58)
  Two generations now had pass'd away,
  Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
  And now the example of the third remain'd.
  All view'd with awe the venerable man;
  Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

  "What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
  To Troy's proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
  That adverse gods commit to stern debate
  The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
  Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
  Nor think your Nestor's years and wisdom vain.
  A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
  Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
  Lives there a chief to match Pirithous' fame,
  Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name;
  Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
  Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
  With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
  In early youth my hardy days I led;
  Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
  And smit with love of honourable deeds,
  Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
  Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters' gore,
  And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
  Yet these with soft persuasive arts I sway'd;
  When Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd.
  If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
  Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
  Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
  That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
  Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
  Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
  Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
  Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
  Him, awful majesty exalts above
  The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
  Let both unite with well-consenting mind,
  So shall authority with strength be join'd.
  Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles' rage;
  Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
  Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
  The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host."

  This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
  "Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But that imperious, that unconquer'd soul,
  No laws can limit, no respect control.
  Before his pride must his superiors fall;
  His word the law, and he the lord of all?
  Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
  What king can bear a rival in his sway?
  Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
  Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?"

  Here on the monarch's speech Achilles broke,
  And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
  "Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
  To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
  Should I submit to each unjust decree:--
  Command thy vassals, but command not me.
  Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doom'd
  My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
  And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
  His conquering sword in any woman's cause.
  The gods command me to forgive the past:
  But let this first invasion be the last:
  For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
  Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade."

  At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
  The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

  Achilles with Patroclus took his way
  Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
  Meantime Atrides launch'd with numerous oars
  A well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores:
  High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed,
  And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
  Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
  Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

  The host to expiate next the king prepares,
  With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
  Wash'd by the briny wave, the pious train(59)
  Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
  Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
  And bulls and goats to Phoebus' altars paid;
  The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
  And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

  The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
  Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
  To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
  Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
  "Haste to the fierce Achilles' tent (he cries),
  Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize:
  Submit he must; or if they will not part,
  Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart."

  The unwilling heralds act their lord's commands;
  Pensive they walk along the barren sands:
  Arrived, the hero in his tent they find,
  With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
  At awful distance long they silent stand,
  Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
  Decent confusion! This the godlike man
  Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

  "With leave and honour enter our abodes,
  Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!(60)
  I know your message; by constraint you came;
  Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
  Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring;
  Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
  But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
  Witness to gods above, and men below!
  But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
  (That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
  Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
  Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
  The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
  Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
  Unskill'd to judge the future by the past,
  In blood and slaughter shall repent at last."

   [Illustration: THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.]

           THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.


  Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
  She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
  Pass'd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
  And of look'd back, slow-moving o'er the strand.
  Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
  But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
  O'er the wild margin of the deep he hung,
  That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:(61)
  There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
  Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

  "O parent goddess! since in early bloom
  Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
  Sure to so short a race of glory born,
  Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
  Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;
  And ill he pays the promise of a god,
  If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,
  Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize."

  Far from the deep recesses of the main,
  Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign,
  The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;
  And like a mist she rose above the tide;
  Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,
  And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
  "Why grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He deeply sighing said: "To tell my woe
  Is but to mention what too well you know.
  From Thebe, sacred to Apollo's name(62)
  (Aetion's realm), our conquering army came,
  With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils,
  Whose just division crown'd the soldier's toils;
  But bright Chryseis, heavenly prize! was led,
  By vote selected, to the general's bed.
  The priest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain
  His beauteous daughter from the victor's chain;
  The fleet he reach'd, and, lowly bending down,
  Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown,
  Intreating all; but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings of Atreus' royal race:
  The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair;
  Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,
  The sire insulted, and his gifts denied:
  The insulted sire (his god's peculiar care)
  To Phoebus pray'd, and Phoebus heard the prayer:
  A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts
  Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.
  A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose,
  And points the crime, and thence derives the woes:
  Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
  To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
  Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm'd;
  Incensed he threaten'd, and his threats perform'd:
  The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent,
  With offer'd gifts to make the god relent;
  But now he seized Briseis' heavenly charms,
  And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms,
  Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;(63)
  And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
  But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
  To high Olympus' shining court ascend,
  Urge all the ties to former service owed,
  And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
  Oft hast thou triumph'd in the glorious boast,
  That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
  When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
  The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
  When the bright partner of his awful reign,
  The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
  The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
  Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
  Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
  (Whom gods Briareus, men Ãgeon name),
  Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
  Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
  With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
  And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
  The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
  They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.(64)
  This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
  Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
  Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
  To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
  To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
  The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
  Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
  O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
  And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
  The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

  [Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.]

          THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.


  "Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
  While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
  Why have I borne thee with a mother's throes,
  To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?(65)
  So short a space the light of heaven to view!
  So short a space! and fill'd with sorrow too!
  O might a parent's careful wish prevail,
  Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
  And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
  Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
  Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'll go
  To great Olympus crown'd with fleecy snow.
  Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far
  Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
  The sire of gods and all the ethereal train,
  On the warm limits of the farthest main,
  Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace
  The feasts of Ãthiopia's blameless race,(66)
  Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite,
  Returning with the twelfth revolving light.
  Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move
  The high tribunal of immortal Jove."

  The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose;
  Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose,
  And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast,
  In wild resentment for the fair he lost.

  In Chrysa's port now sage Ulysses rode;
  Beneath the deck the destined victims stow'd:
  The sails they furl'd, they lash the mast aside,
  And dropp'd their anchors, and the pinnace tied.
  Next on the shore their hecatomb they land;
  Chryseis last descending on the strand.
  Her, thus returning from the furrow'd main,
  Ulysses led to Phoebus' sacred fane;
  Where at his solemn altar, as the maid
  He gave to Chryses, thus the hero said:

  "Hail, reverend priest! to Phoebus' awful dome
  A suppliant I from great Atrides come:
  Unransom'd, here receive the spotless fair;
  Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare;
  And may thy god who scatters darts around,
  Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound."(67)

  At this, the sire embraced the maid again,
  So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.
  Then near the altar of the darting king,
  Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring;
  With water purify their hands, and take
  The sacred offering of the salted cake;
  While thus with arms devoutly raised in air,
  And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer:

  "God of the silver bow, thy ear incline,
  Whose power incircles Cilla the divine;
  Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys,
  And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguish'd rays!
  If, fired to vengeance at thy priest's request,
  Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest:
  Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe,
  And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow."

  So Chryses pray'd. Apollo heard his prayer:
  And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare;
  Between their horns the salted barley threw,
  And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:(68)
  The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide;
  The thighs, selected to the gods, divide:
  On these, in double cauls involved with art,
  The choicest morsels lay from every part.
  The priest himself before his altar stands,
  And burns the offering with his holy hands.
  Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire;
  The youth with instruments surround the fire:
  The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd,
  The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare;
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
  With pure libations they conclude the feast;
  The youths with wine the copious goblets crown'd,
  And, pleased, dispense the flowing bowls around;(69)
  With hymns divine the joyous banquet ends,
  The paeans lengthen'd till the sun descends:
  The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes prolong;
  Apollo listens, and approves the song.

  'Twas night; the chiefs beside their vessel lie,
  Till rosy morn had purpled o'er the sky:
  Then launch, and hoist the mast: indulgent gales,
  Supplied by Phoebus, fill the swelling sails;
  The milk-white canvas bellying as they blow,
  The parted ocean foams and roars below:
  Above the bounding billows swift they flew,
  Till now the Grecian camp appear'd in view.
  Far on the beach they haul their bark to land,
  (The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,)
  Then part, where stretch'd along the winding bay,
  The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.

  But raging still, amidst his navy sat
  The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate;
  Nor mix'd in combat, nor in council join'd;
  But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind:
  In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll,
  And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.

  Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light
  The gods had summon'd to the Olympian height:
  Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers,
  Leads the long order of ethereal powers.
  When, like the morning-mist in early day,
  Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea:
  And to the seats divine her flight address'd.
  There, far apart, and high above the rest,
  The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds
  His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
  Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed
  Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
  "If e'er, O father of the gods! (she said)
  My words could please thee, or my actions aid,
  Some marks of honour on my son bestow,
  And pay in glory what in life you owe.
  Fame is at least by heavenly promise due
  To life so short, and now dishonour'd too.
  Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise!
  Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
  Till the proud king and all the Achaian race
  Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace."

      [Illustration: THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.]

              THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.


  Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held
  The sacred counsels of his breast conceal'd.
  Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press'd,
  Still grasp'd his knees, and urged the dear request.
  "O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
  Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
  Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
  Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?"

  She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
  Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies:

  "What hast thou ask'd? ah, why should Jove engage
  In foreign contests and domestic rage,
  The gods' complaints, and Juno's fierce alarms,
  While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
  Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
  With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
  But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
  Witness the sacred honours of our head,
  The nod that ratifies the will divine,
  The faithful, fix'd, irrevocable sign;
  This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows--"
  He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,(70)
  Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
  The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
  High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
  And all Olympus to the centre shook.(71)

  Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
  Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.
  The shining synod of the immortals wait
  The coming god, and from their thrones of state
  Arising silent, wrapp'd in holy fear,
  Before the majesty of heaven appear.
  Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,
  All, but the god's imperious queen alone:
  Late had she view'd the silver-footed dame,
  And all her passions kindled into flame.
  "Say, artful manager of heaven (she cries),
  Who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
  Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate,
  In vain the partner of imperial state.
  What favourite goddess then those cares divides,
  Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?"

  To this the thunderer: "Seek not thou to find
  The sacred counsels of almighty mind:
  Involved in darkness likes the great decree,
  Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.
  What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know;
  The first of gods above, and men below;
  But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll
  Deep in the close recesses of my soul."

  Full on the sire the goddess of the skies
  Roll'd the large orbs of her majestic eyes,
  And thus return'd:--"Austere Saturnius, say,
  From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway?
  Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force,
  And all thy counsels take the destined course.
  But 'tis for Greece I fear: for late was seen,
  In close consult, the silver-footed queen.
  Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny,
  Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky.
  What fatal favour has the goddess won,
  To grace her fierce, inexorable son?
  Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain,
  And glut his vengeance with my people slain."

  Then thus the god: "O restless fate of pride,
  That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide;
  Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorr'd,
  Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord.
  Let this suffice: the immutable decree
  No force can shake: what is, that ought to be.
  Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand,
  But dread the power of this avenging hand:
  The united strength of all the gods above
  In vain resists the omnipotence of Jove."

                         [Illustration: VULCAN.]

                                 VULCAN.


  The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply;
  A reverent horror silenced all the sky.
  The feast disturb'd, with sorrow Vulcan saw
  His mother menaced, and the gods in awe;
  Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design,
  Thus interposed the architect divine:
  "The wretched quarrels of the mortal state
  Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate:
  Let men their days in senseless strife employ,
  We, in eternal peace and constant joy.
  Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply,
  Nor break the sacred union of the sky:
  Lest, roused to rage, he shake the bless'd abodes,
  Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods.
  If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased;
  The gracious power is willing to be pleased."

  Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound,
  The double bowl with sparkling nectar crown'd,(72)
  Which held to Juno in a cheerful way,
  "Goddess (he cried), be patient and obey.
  Dear as you are, if Jove his arm extend,
  I can but grieve, unable to defend
  What god so daring in your aid to move,
  Or lift his hand against the force of Jove?
  Once in your cause I felt his matchless might,
  Hurl'd headlong down from the ethereal height;(73)
  Toss'd all the day in rapid circles round,
  Nor till the sun descended touch'd the ground.
  Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost;
  The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;(74)

  He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,
  Which, with a smile, the white-arm'd queen received
  Then, to the rest he fill'd; and in his turn,
  Each to his lips applied the nectar'd urn,
  Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
  And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.

  Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
  In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.(75)
  Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
  With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
  Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
  Descending swift, roll'd down the rapid light:
  Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
  The shining monuments of Vulcan's art:
  Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
  And Juno slumber'd on the golden bed.

                         [Illustration: JUPITER.]

                                 JUPITER.


                 [Illustration: THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.]

                         THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.





BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.

THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.

Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful vision
to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in order to make
the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The general, who is deluded
with the hopes of taking Troy without his assistance, but fears the army
was discouraged by his absence, and the late plague, as well as by the
length of time, contrives to make trial of their disposition by a
stratagem. He first communicates his design to the princes in council,
that he would propose a return to the soldiers, and that they should put a
stop to them if the proposal was embraced. Then he assembles the whole
host, and upon moving for a return to Greece, they unanimously agree to
it, and run to prepare the ships. They are detained by the management of
Ulysses, who chastises the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is
recalled, several speeches made on the occasion, and at length the advice
of Nestor followed, which was to make a general muster of the troops, and
to divide them into their several nations, before they proceeded to
battle. This gives occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the
Greeks and Trojans, and in a large catalogue.

The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The scene
lies in the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards the end it
removes to Troy.

  Now pleasing sleep had seal'd each mortal eye,
  Stretch'd in the tents the Grecian leaders lie:
  The immortals slumber'd on their thrones above;
  All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.(76)
  To honour Thetis' son he bends his care,
  And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war:
  Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,
  And thus commands the vision of the night.

  "Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,(77)
  To Agamemnon's ample tent repair.
  Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
  Declare, e'en now 'tis given him to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall."

  Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
  Descends, and hovers o'er Atrides' head;
  Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
  Renown'd for wisdom, and revered for age:
  Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
  And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.

       [Illustration: JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.]

               JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.


  "Canst thou, with all a monarch's cares oppress'd,
  O Atreus' son! canst thou indulge the rest?(78)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides,
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.(79)
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
  Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
  Awake, but waking this advice approve,
  And trust the vision that descends from Jove."

  The phantom said; then vanish'd from his sight,
  Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
  A thousand schemes the monarch's mind employ;
  Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
  Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
  Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design'd,
  What mighty toils to either host remain,
  What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
  Eager he rises, and in fancy hears
  The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
  First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,
  Around him next the regal mantle threw,
  The embroider'd sandals on his feet were tied;
  The starry falchion glitter'd at his side;
  And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads,
  Unstain'd, immortal, and the gift of gods.

  Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
  Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
  The king despatch'd his heralds with commands
  To range the camp and summon all the bands:
  The gathering hosts the monarch's word obey;
  While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
  In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
  There calls a senate of the peers around:
  The assembly placed, the king of men express'd
  The counsels labouring in his artful breast.

  "Friends and confederates! with attentive ear
  Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
  Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
  A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
  Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
  The same in habit, and in mien the same.(80)
  The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
  'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides;
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
  Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

  This hear observant, and the gods obey!'
  The vision spoke, and pass'd in air away.
  Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,
  Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms.
  But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,
  Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
  To move the troops to measure back the main,
  Be mine; and yours the province to detain."

  He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
  (Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy realms obey'd,)
  "Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
  Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
  Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
  Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
  Then let us haste, obey the god's alarms,
  And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms."

  Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
  Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
  The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
  Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
  As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
  Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
  Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
  With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
  Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
  And o'er the vale descends the living cloud.(81)
  So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
  Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
  Along the region runs a deafening sound;
  Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
  Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
  And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
  Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud(82)
  The monarch's will, suspend the listening crowd.
  Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
  And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
  The king of kings his awful figure raised:
  High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
  The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
  By Vulcan form'd, from Jove to Hermes came.
  To Pelops he the immortal gift resign'd;
  The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,
  In Atreus' hand, which not with Atreus ends,
  To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;
  And now the mark of Agamemnon's reign,
  Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.(83)

  On this bright sceptre now the king reclined,
  And artful thus pronounced the speech design'd:
  "Ye sons of Mars, partake your leader's care,
  Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the war!
  Of partial Jove with justice I complain,
  And heavenly oracles believed in vain
  A safe return was promised to our toils,
  Renown'd, triumphant, and enrich'd with spoils.
  Now shameful flight alone can save the host,
  Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost.
  So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
  At whose command whole empires rise or fall:
  He shakes the feeble props of human trust,
  And towns and armies humbles to the dust
  What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage,
  Oh, lasting shame in every future age!
  Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow,
  Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.
  So small their number, that if wars were ceased,
  And Greece triumphant held a general feast,
  All rank'd by tens, whole decades when they dine
  Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.(84)
  But other forces have our hopes o'erthrown,
  And Troy prevails by armies not her own.
  Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run,
  Since first the labours of this war begun:
  Our cordage torn, decay'd our vessels lie,
  And scarce insure the wretched power to fly.
  Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall!
  Our weeping wives, our tender children call:
  Love, duty, safety, summon us away,
  'Tis nature's voice, and nature we obey,
  Our shatter'd barks may yet transport us o'er,
  Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
  Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ,
  And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy."

  His deep design unknown, the hosts approve
  Atrides' speech. The mighty numbers move.
  So roll the billows to the Icarian shore,
  From east and south when winds begin to roar,
  Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep
  The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
  And as on corn when western gusts descend,(85)
  Before the blast the lofty harvests bend:
  Thus o'er the field the moving host appears,
  With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
  The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet
  Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;
  With long-resounding cries they urge the train
  To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
  They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise,
  The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
  E'en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
  And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
  But Jove's imperial queen their flight survey'd,
  And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

  "Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
  And leave unpunish'd this perfidious race?
  Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
  In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
  And bravest chiefs, in Helen's quarrel slain,
  Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
  No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
  Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
  Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
  Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main."

  Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' height
  Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
  Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
  For prudent counsel like the gods renown'd:
  Oppress'd with generous grief the hero stood,
  Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
  "And is it thus, divine Laertes' son,
  Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun),
  Thus to their country bear their own disgrace,
  And fame eternal leave to Priam's race?
  Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,
  Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
  Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame,
  Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
  Your own resistless eloquence employ,
  And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy."

  The voice divine confess'd the warlike maid,
  Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obey'd:
  Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand
  Received the imperial sceptre of command.
  Thus graced, attention and respect to gain,
  He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train;
  Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved,
  He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.

  "Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless'd,
  By brave examples should confirm the rest.
  The monarch's will not yet reveal'd appears;
  He tries our courage, but resents our fears.
  The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke;
  Not thus the king in secret council spoke.
  Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs,
  Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings."

  But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose,
  Him with reproof he check'd or tamed with blows.
  "Be still, thou slave, and to thy betters yield;
  Unknown alike in council and in field!
  Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
  Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.
  Be silent, wretch, and think not here allow'd
  That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
  To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway;
  His are the laws, and him let all obey."(86)

  With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled,
  The loudest silenced, and the fiercest cool'd.
  Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,
  Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain.
  Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars,
  And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores;
  The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound,
  The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
  At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease,
  And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.
  Thersites only clamour'd in the throng,
  Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:
  Awed by no shame, by no respect controll'd,
  In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:
  With witty malice studious to defame,
  Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:--
  But chief he gloried with licentious style
  To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
  His figure such as might his soul proclaim;
  One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame:
  His mountain shoulders half his breast o'erspread,
  Thin hairs bestrew'd his long misshapen head.
  Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess'd,
  And much he hated all, but most the best:
  Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;
  But royal scandal his delight supreme,
  Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,
  Vex'd when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
  Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone,
  Thus with injurious taunts attack'd the throne.

  "Amidst the glories of so bright a reign,
  What moves the great Atrides to complain?
  'Tis thine whate'er the warrior's breast inflames,
  The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
  With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
  Thy tents are crowded and thy chests o'erflow.
  Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll'd,
  What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold?
  Say, shall we march with our unconquer'd powers
  (The Greeks and I) to Ilion's hostile towers,
  And bring the race of royal bastards here,
  For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
  But safer plunder thy own host supplies;
  Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader's prize?
  Or, if thy heart to generous love be led,
  Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
  Whate'er our master craves submit we must,
  Plagued with his pride, or punish'd for his lust.
  Oh women of Achaia; men no more!
  Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store
  In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.
  We may be wanted on some busy day,
  When Hector comes: so great Achilles may:
  From him he forced the prize we jointly gave,
  From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:
  And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong,
  This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long."

  Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,(87)
  In generous vengeance of the king of kings.
  With indignation sparkling in his eyes,
  He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies:

  "Peace, factious monster, born to vex the state,
  With wrangling talents form'd for foul debate:
  Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain,
  And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.
  Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host,
  The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
  Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring,
  Nor let those lips profane the name of king.
  For our return we trust the heavenly powers;
  Be that their care; to fight like men be ours.
  But grant the host with wealth the general load,
  Except detraction, what hast thou bestow'd?
  Suppose some hero should his spoils resign,
  Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine?
  Gods! let me perish on this hateful shore,
  And let these eyes behold my son no more;
  If, on thy next offence, this hand forbear
  To strip those arms thou ill deserv'st to wear,
  Expel the council where our princes meet,
  And send thee scourged and howling through the fleet."

  He said, and cowering as the dastard bends,
  The weighty sceptre on his bank descends.(88)
  On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise:
  The tears spring starting from his haggard eyes;
  Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,
  From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears;
  While to his neighbour each express'd his thought:

  "Ye gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought!
  What fruits his conduct and his courage yield!
  Great in the council, glorious in the field.
  Generous he rises in the crown's defence,
  To curb the factious tongue of insolence,
  Such just examples on offenders shown,
  Sedition silence, and assert the throne."

  'Twas thus the general voice the hero praised,
  Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
  The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
  (In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
  The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
  To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
  Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
  His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

  "Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
  With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
  Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
  Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
  Ne'er to return, was then the common cry,
  Till Troy's proud structures should in ashes lie.
  Behold them weeping for their native shore;
  What could their wives or helpless children more?
  What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
  And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
  Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
  When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
  Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
  The tedious length of nine revolving years.
  Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
  But vanquish'd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
  Expect the time to Troy's destruction given.
  And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
  What pass'd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,(89)
  And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
  Beside a fountain's sacred brink we raised
  Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
  'Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
  The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
  A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
  From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
  Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll'd,
  And curl'd around in many a winding fold;
  The topmost branch a mother-bird possess'd;
  Eight callow infants fill'd the mossy nest;
  Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung,
  Stretch'd his black jaws and crush'd the crying young;
  While hovering near, with miserable moan,
  The drooping mother wail'd her children gone.
  The mother last, as round the nest she flew,
  Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew;
  Nor long survived: to marble turn'd, he stands
  A lasting prodigy on Aulis' sands.
  Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare
  Trust in his omen, and support the war.
  For while around we gazed with wondering eyes,
  And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice,
  Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,(90)
  'Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.
  This wondrous signal Jove himself displays,
  Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
  As many birds as by the snake were slain,
  So many years the toils of Greece remain;
  But wait the tenth, for Ilion's fall decreed:'
  Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates succeed.
  Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait,
  Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate."
  He said: the shores with loud applauses sound,
  The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
  Then Nestor thus--"These vain debates forbear,
  Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
  Where now are all your high resolves at last?
  Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
  Vow'd with libations and with victims then,
  Now vanish'd like their smoke: the faith of men!
  While useless words consume the unactive hours,
  No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.
  Rise, great Atrides! and with courage sway;
  We march to war, if thou direct the way.
  But leave the few that dare resist thy laws,
  The mean deserters of the Grecian cause,
  To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares,
  And view with envy our successful wars.
  On that great day, when first the martial train,
  Big with the fate of Ilion, plough'd the main,
  Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent,
  And thunder rolling shook the firmament.
  Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife,
  Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife,
  Till Helen's woes at full revenged appear,
  And Troy's proud matrons render tear for tear.
  Before that day, if any Greek invite
  His country's troops to base, inglorious flight,
  Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,
  And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
  But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:(91)
  Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise.
  Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;
  In tribes and nations to divide thy train:
  His separate troops let every leader call,
  Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
  What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,
  Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command,
  When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known
  And what the cause of Ilion not o'erthrown;
  If fate resists, or if our arms are slow,
  If gods above prevent, or men below."

  To him the king: "How much thy years excel
  In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
  O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree
  But ten such sages as they grant in thee;
  Such wisdom soon should Priam's force destroy,
  And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!
  But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
  In fierce contention and in vain debates:
  Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws,
  By me provoked; a captive maid the cause:
  If e'er as friends we join, the Trojan wall
  Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
  But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;
  And, well refresh'd, to bloody conflict haste.
  His sharpen'd spear let every Grecian wield,
  And every Grecian fix his brazen shield,
  Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,
  And all for combat fit the rattling car.
  This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;
  No rest, no respite, till the shades descend;
  Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all:
  Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;
  Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast,
  With the huge shield each brawny arm depress'd,
  Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw,
  And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
  Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,
  Who dares to tremble on this signal day;
  That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power,
  The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour."

  The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose,
  Loud as the surges when the tempest blows,
  That dash'd on broken rocks tumultuous roar,
  And foam and thunder on the stony shore.
  Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend,
  The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend;
  With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray,
  To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.
  A steer of five years' age, large limb'd, and fed,(92)
  To Jove's high altars Agamemnon led:
  There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;
  And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
  Next came Idomeneus,(93)
  and Tydeus' son,(94)
  Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;(95)
  Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;
  And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.(96)
  The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take
  The sacred offering of the salted cake:
  When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;
  "O thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air,
  Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!
  Hear! and before the burning sun descends,
  Before the night her gloomy veil extends,
  Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires,
  Be Priam's palace sunk in Grecian fires.
  In Hector's breast be plunged this shining sword,
  And slaughter'd heroes groan around their lord!"

  Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer
  Great Jove refused, and toss'd in empty air:
  The God averse, while yet the fumes arose,
  Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes.
  Their prayers perform'd the chiefs the rite pursue,
  The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
  The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide,
  The thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
  On these, in double cauls involved with art,
  The choicest morsels lie from every part,
  From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire
  While the fat victims feed the sacred fire.
  The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd
  The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest;
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress'd,
  The generous Nestor thus the prince address'd.

  "Now bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms,
  And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms;
  Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey,
  And lead to war when heaven directs the way."

  He said; the monarch issued his commands;
  Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands
  The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide,
  In tribes and nations rank'd on either side.
  High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;
  From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes;
  The dreadful aegis, Jove's immortal shield,
  Blazed on her arm, and lighten'd all the field:
  Round the vast orb a hundred serpents roll'd,
  Form'd the bright fringe, and seem'd to burn in gold,
  With this each Grecian's manly breast she warms,
  Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,
  No more they sigh, inglorious, to return,
  But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

  As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,
  The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above;
  The fires expanding, as the winds arise,
  Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies:
  So from the polish'd arms, and brazen shields,
  A gleamy splendour flash'd along the fields.
  Not less their number than the embodied cranes,
  Or milk-white swans in Asius' watery plains.
  That, o'er the windings of Cayster's springs,(97)
  Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,
  Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds,
  Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
  Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
  The legions crowd Scamander's flowery side;(98)
  With rushing troops the plains are cover'd o'er,
  And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
  Along the river's level meads they stand,
  Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
  Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
  The wandering nation of a summer's day:
  That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
  In gather'd swarms surround the rural bowers;
  From pail to pail with busy murmur run
  The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
  So throng'd, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood
  In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
  Each leader now his scatter'd force conjoins
  In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
  Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain
  Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
  The king of kings, majestically tall,
  Towers o'er his armies, and outshines them all;
  Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads
  His subject herds, the monarch of the meads,
  Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen,
  His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;(99)
  Jove o'er his eyes celestial glories spread,
  And dawning conquest played around his head.

  Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,
  All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine!(100)
  Since earth's wide regions, heaven's umneasur'd height,
  And hell's abyss, hide nothing from your sight,
  (We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below,
  But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)
  O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame,
  Or urged by wrongs, to Troy's destruction came.
  To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,
  A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
  Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you
  The mighty labour dauntless I pursue;
  What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,
  Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.

                     THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.(101)

                         [Illustration: NEPTUNE.]

                                 NEPTUNE.


  The hardy warriors whom Boeotia bred,
  Penelius, Leitus, Prothoenor, led:
  With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,
  Equal in arms, and equal in command.
  These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields,
  And Eteon's hills, and Hyrie's watery fields,
  And Schoenos, Scholos, Graea near the main,
  And Mycalessia's ample piny plain;
  Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,
  Or Harma where Apollo's prophet fell;
  Heleon and Hyle, which the springs o'erflow;
  And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
  Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,
  Or Thespia sacred to the god of day:
  Onchestus, Neptune's celebrated groves;
  Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves;
  For flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the vine;
  Platea green, and Nysa the divine;
  And they whom Thebe's well-built walls inclose,
  Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose;
  And Arne rich, with purple harvests crown'd;
  And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost bound.
  Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys
  Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.(102)

  To these succeed Aspledon's martial train,
  Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
  Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng,
  Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
  Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair,
  Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:
  (In Actor's court as she retired to rest,
  The strength of Mars the blushing maid compress'd)
  Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,
  With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.

  The Phocians next in forty barks repair;
  Epistrophus and Schedius head the war:
  From those rich regions where Cephisus leads
  His silver current through the flowery meads;
  From Panopea, Chrysa the divine,
  Where Anemoria's stately turrets shine,
  Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
  And fair Lilaea views the rising flood.
  These, ranged in order on the floating tide,
  Close, on the left, the bold Boeotians' side.

  Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
  Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant son;
  Skill'd to direct the flying dart aright;
  Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
  Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend,
  Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;
  Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe's bands;
  And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
  And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands,
  Or in fair Tarphe's sylvan seats reside:
  In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.

  Euboea next her martial sons prepares,
  And sends the brave Abantes to the wars:
  Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way
  From Chalcis' walls, and strong Eretria;
  The Isteian fields for generous vines renown'd,
  The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground;
  Where Dios from her towers o'erlooks the plain,
  And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.
  Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair;
  Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air;
  But with protended spears in fighting fields
  Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields.
  Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands,
  Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.

  Full fifty more from Athens stem the main,
  Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain.
  (Athens the fair, where great Erectheus sway'd,
  That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
  But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
  The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.
  Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane,
  Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain;
  Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze,
  And all the tribes resound the goddess' praise.)
  No chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,
  To marshal armies in the dusty field,
  The extended wings of battle to display,
  Or close the embodied host in firm array.
  Nestor alone, improved by length of days,
  For martial conduct bore an equal praise.

  With these appear the Salaminian bands,
  Whom the gigantic Telamon commands;
  In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,
  And with the great Athenians join their force.

  Next move to war the generous Argive train,
  From high Troezene, and Maseta's plain,
  And fair Ãgina circled by the main:
  Whom strong Tyrinthe's lofty walls surround,
  And Epidaure with viny harvests crown'd:
  And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show
  Their cliffs above, and ample bay below.
  These by the brave Euryalus were led,
  Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed;
  But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway:
  In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

  The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
  Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,(103)
  Fair Araethyrea, Ornia's fruitful plain,
  And Ãgion, and Adrastus' ancient reign;
  And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
  And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
  Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
  And Gonoessa's spires salute the sky.
  Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
  A hundred vessels in long order stand,
  And crowded nations wait his dread command.
  High on the deck the king of men appears,
  And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
  Proud of his host, unrivall'd in his reign,
  In silent pomp he moves along the main.

  His brother follows, and to vengeance warms
  The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
  Phares and Brysia's valiant troops, and those
  Whom Lacedaemon's lofty hills inclose;
  Or Messe's towers for silver doves renown'd,
  Amyclae, Laas, Augia's happy ground,
  And those whom OEtylos' low walls contain,
  And Helos, on the margin of the main:
  These, o'er the bending ocean, Helen's cause,
  In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:
  Eager and loud from man to man he flies,
  Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;
  While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears
  The fair one's grief, and sees her falling tears.

  In ninety sail, from Pylos' sandy coast,
  Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host:
  From Amphigenia's ever-fruitful land,
  Where Ãpy high, and little Pteleon stand;
  Where beauteous Arene her structures shows,
  And Thryon's walls Alpheus' streams inclose:
  And Dorion, famed for Thamyris' disgrace,
  Superior once of all the tuneful race,
  Till, vain of mortals' empty praise, he strove
  To match the seed of cloud-compelling Jove!
  Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride
  The immortal Muses in their art defied.
  The avenging Muses of the light of day
  Deprived his eyes, and snatch'd his voice away;
  No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing,
  His hand no more awaked the silver string.

  Where under high Cyllene, crown'd with wood,
  The shaded tomb of old Ãpytus stood;
  From Ripe, Stratie, Tegea's bordering towns,
  The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,
  Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;
  And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove;
  Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,
  And high Enispe shook by wintry wind,
  And fair Mantinea's ever-pleasing site;
  In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite.
  Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,
  (Ancaeus' son) the mighty squadron led.
  Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon's care,
  Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear;
  The first to battle on the appointed plain,
  But new to all the dangers of the main.

  Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
  Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
  And bounded there, where o'er the valleys rose
  The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows;
  Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:
  The strength and glory of the Epean name.
  In separate squadrons these their train divide,
  Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
  One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
  (Eurytus' this, and that Teatus' son;)
  Diores sprung from Amarynceus' line;
  And great Polyxenus, of force divine.

  But those who view fair Elis o'er the seas
  From the blest islands of the Echinades,
  In forty vessels under Meges move,
  Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
  To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
  And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

  Ulysses follow'd through the watery road,
  A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
  With those whom Cephalenia's line inclosed,
  Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
  Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
  Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
  Where Ãgilipa's rugged sides are seen,
  Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
  These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
  Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

  Thoas came next, Andraemon's valiant son,
  From Pleuron's walls, and chalky Calydon,
  And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,
  And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep.
  He led the warriors from the Ãtolian shore,
  For now the sons of OEneus were no more!
  The glories of the mighty race were fled!
  OEneus himself, and Meleager dead!
  To Thoas' care now trust the martial train,
  His forty vessels follow through the main.

  Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,
  Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna's bands;
  And those who dwell where Rhytion's domes arise,
  Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies,
  Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs;
  Crete's hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
  These march'd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care,
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.

  Tlepolemus, the sun of Hercules,
  Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,
  From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright,
  Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
  His captive mother fierce Alcides bore
  From Ephyr's walls and Selle's winding shore,
  Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,
  And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
  The hero, when to manly years he grew,
  Alcides' uncle, old Licymnius, slew;
  For this, constrain'd to quit his native place,
  And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race,
  A fleet he built, and with a numerous train
  Of willing exiles wander'd o'er the main;
  Where, many seas and many sufferings past,
  On happy Rhodes the chief arrived at last:
  There in three tribes divides his native band,
  And rules them peaceful in a foreign land;
  Increased and prosper'd in their new abodes
  By mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods;
  With joy they saw the growing empire rise,
  And showers of wealth descending from the skies.

  Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore,
  Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore,
  Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace,
  The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;(104)
  Pelides only match'd his early charms;
  But few his troops, and small his strength in arms.

  Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain,
  Of those Calydnae's sea-girt isles contain;
  With them the youth of Nisyrus repair,
  Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair;
  Cos, where Eurypylus possess'd the sway,
  Till great Alcides made the realms obey:
  These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring,
  Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.

  Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argos' powers,
  From Alos, Alope, and Trechin's towers:
  From Phthia's spacious vales; and Hella, bless'd
  With female beauty far beyond the rest.
  Full fifty ships beneath Achilles' care,
  The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;
  Thessalians all, though various in their name;
  The same their nation, and their chief the same.
  But now inglorious, stretch'd along the shore,
  They hear the brazen voice of war no more;
  No more the foe they face in dire array:
  Close in his fleet the angry leader lay;
  Since fair Briseis from his arms was torn,
  The noblest spoil from sack'd Lyrnessus borne,
  Then, when the chief the Theban walls o'erthrew,
  And the bold sons of great Evenus slew.
  There mourn'd Achilles, plunged in depth of care,
  But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.

  To these the youth of Phylace succeed,
  Itona, famous for her fleecy breed,
  And grassy Pteleon deck'd with cheerful greens,
  The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
  Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown'd,
  And Antron's watery dens, and cavern'd ground.
  These own'd, as chief, Protesilas the brave,
  Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
  The first who boldly touch'd the Trojan shore,
  And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
  There lies, far distant from his native plain;
  Unfinish'd his proud palaces remain,
  And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
  His troops in forty ships Podarces led,
  Iphiclus' son, and brother to the dead;
  Nor he unworthy to command the host;
  Yet still they mourn'd their ancient leader lost.

  The men who Glaphyra's fair soil partake,
  Where hills incircle Boebe's lowly lake,
  Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall,
  Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall,
  In ten black ships embark'd for Ilion's shore,
  With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore:
  All Pelias' race Alceste far outshined,
  The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,

  The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields,
  Olizon's rocks, or Meliboea's fields,
  With Philoctetes sail'd whose matchless art
  From the tough bow directs the feather'd dart.
  Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row,
  Skill'd in his science of the dart and bow.
  But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,
  A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound;
  There groan'd the chief in agonizing pain,
  Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
  His forces Medon led from Lemnos' shore,
  Oileus' son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.

  The OEchalian race, in those high towers contain'd
  Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reign'd,
  Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,
  Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,
  In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide,
  Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
  To these his skill their parent-god imparts,
  Divine professors of the healing arts.

  The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands
  In forty barks Eurypylus commands.
  Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow,
  And where Hyperia's silver fountains flow.
  Thy troops, Argissa, Polypoetes leads,
  And Eleon, shelter'd by Olympus' shades,
  Gyrtone's warriors; and where Orthe lies,
  And Oloosson's chalky cliffs arise.
  Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race,
  The fruit of fair Hippodame's embrace,
  (That day, when hurl'd from Pelion's cloudy head,
  To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)
  With Polypoetes join'd in equal sway
  Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey.

  In twenty sail the bold Perrhaebians came
  From Cyphus, Guneus was their leader's name.
  With these the Enians join'd, and those who freeze
  Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees;
  Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
  And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;
  Yet o'er the silvery surface pure they flow,
  The sacred stream unmix'd with streams below,
  Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes
  Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!

  Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
  (Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon's blood;)
  Who dwell where Pelion, crown'd with piny boughs,
  Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;
  Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus stray'd:
  (The region stretch'd beneath his mighty shade:)
  In forty sable barks they stemm'd the main;
  Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.

  Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
  Who bravest fought, or rein'd the noblest steeds?
  Eumelus' mares were foremost in the chase,
  As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race;
  Bred where Pieria's fruitful fountains flow,
  And train'd by him who bears the silver bow.
  Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame,
  Their height, their colour, and their age the same;
  O'er fields of death they whirl the rapid car,
  And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
  Ajax in arms the first renown acquired,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:
  (His was the strength that mortal might exceeds,
  And his the unrivall'd race of heavenly steeds:)
  But Thetis' son now shines in arms no more;
  His troops, neglected on the sandy shore.
  In empty air their sportive javelins throw,
  Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow:
  Unstain'd with blood his cover'd chariots stand;
  The immortal coursers graze along the strand;
  But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored,
  And, wandering o'er the camp, required their lord.

  Now, like a deluge, covering all around,
  The shining armies sweep along the ground;
  Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise,
  Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies.
  Earth groan'd beneath them; as when angry Jove
  Hurls down the forky lightning from above,
  On Arime when he the thunder throws,
  And fires Typhoeus with redoubled blows,
  Where Typhon, press'd beneath the burning load,
  Still feels the fury of the avenging god.

  But various Iris, Jove's commands to bear,
  Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air;
  In Priam's porch the Trojan chiefs she found,
  The old consulting, and the youths around.
  Polites' shape, the monarch's son, she chose,
  Who from Ãsetes' tomb observed the foes,(105)
  High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay
  The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.
  In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring
  The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.

  "Cease to consult, the time for action calls;
  War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
  Assembled armies oft have I beheld;
  But ne'er till now such numbers charged a field:
  Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,
  The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
  Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,
  Assemble all the united bands of Troy;
  In just array let every leader call
  The foreign troops: this day demands them all!"

  The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;
  The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train,
  Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,
  Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground:
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.

  Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands
  A rising mount, the work of human hands;
  (This for Myrinne's tomb the immortals know,
  Though call'd Bateia in the world below;)
  Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,
  The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.

  The godlike Hector, high above the rest,
  Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest:
  In throngs around his native bands repair,
  And groves of lances glitter in the air.

  Divine Ãneas brings the Dardan race,
  Anchises' son, by Venus' stolen embrace,
  Born in the shades of Ida's secret grove;
  (A mortal mixing with the queen of love;)
  Archilochus and Acamas divide
  The warrior's toils, and combat by his side.

  Who fair Zeleia's wealthy valleys till,(106)
  Fast by the foot of Ida's sacred hill,
  Or drink, Ãsepus, of thy sable flood,
  Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood;
  To whom his art Apollo deign'd to show,
  Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.

  From rich Apaesus and Adrestia's towers,
  High Teree's summits, and Pityea's bowers;
  From these the congregated troops obey
  Young Amphius and Adrastus' equal sway;
  Old Merops' sons; whom, skill'd in fates to come,
  The sire forewarn'd, and prophesied their doom:
  Fate urged them on! the sire forewarn'd in vain,
  They rush'd to war, and perish'd on the plain.

  From Practius' stream, Percote's pasture lands,
  And Sestos and Abydos' neighbouring strands,
  From great Arisba's walls and Selle's coast,
  Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host:
  High on his car he shakes the flowing reins,
  His fiery coursers thunder o'er the plains.

  The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown'd,
  March from Larissa's ever-fertile ground:
  In equal arms their brother leaders shine,
  Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.

  Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,
  In dread array, from Thracia's wintry coasts;
  Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,
  And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.

  With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
  Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.

  Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend,
  Skill'd in the fight their crooked bows to bend;
  From Axius' ample bed he leads them on,
  Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
  Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floating region fills.

  The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
  Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
  Where Erythinus' rising cliffs are seen,
  Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
  And where Ãgialus and Cromna lie,
  And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
  And where Parthenius, roll'd through banks of flowers,
  Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

  Here march'd in arms the Halizonian band,
  Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
  From those far regions where the sun refines
  The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

  There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
  And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
  For stern Achilles lopp'd his sacred head,
  Roll'd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

  Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
  The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

  Of those who round Maeonia's realms reside,
  Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
  Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
  Born on the banks of Gyges' silent lake.
  There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
  High Mycale, and Latmos' shady brows,
  And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
  With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.(107)
  Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
  Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
  Who, trick'd with gold, and glittering on his car,
  Rode like a woman to the field of war.
  Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
  The river swept him to the briny main:
  There whelm'd with waves the gaudy warrior lies
  The valiant victor seized the golden prize.

  The forces last in fair array succeed,
  Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead
  The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields,
  Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields.





BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.

THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.

The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon between
Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the determination
of the war. Iris is sent to call Helen to behold the fight. She leads her
to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his counsellers observing the
Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom Helen gives an account of the
chief of them. The kings on either part take the solemn oath for the
conditions of the combat. The duel ensues; wherein Paris being overcome,
he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus, and transported to his apartment.
She then calls Helen from the walls, and brings the lovers together.
Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians, demands the restoration of Helen,
and the performance of the articles.

The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book. The
scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and sometimes in Troy
itself.

  Thus by their leaders' care each martial band
  Moves into ranks, and stretches o'er the land.
  With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar,
  Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war
  So when inclement winters vex the plain
  With piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain,
  To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly,(108)
  With noise, and order, through the midway sky;
  To pigmy nations wounds and death they bring,
  And all the war descends upon the wing,
  But silent, breathing rage, resolved and skill'd(109)
  By mutual aids to fix a doubtful field,
  Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust around
  Darkening arises from the labour'd ground.
  Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds
  A night of vapours round the mountain heads,
  Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade,
  To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade;
  While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey,
  Lost and confused amidst the thicken'd day:
  So wrapp'd in gathering dust, the Grecian train,
  A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.

  Now front to front the hostile armies stand,
  Eager of fight, and only wait command;
  When, to the van, before the sons of fame
  Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
  In form a god! the panther's speckled hide
  Flow'd o'er his armour with an easy pride:
  His bended bow across his shoulders flung,
  His sword beside him negligently hung;
  Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,
  And dared the bravest of the Grecian race.

  As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain,
  He boldly stalk'd, the foremost on the plain,
  Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
  With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:
  So joys a lion, if the branching deer,
  Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;
  Eager he seizes and devours the slain,
  Press'd by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
  Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound,
  In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground
  From his high chariot: him, approaching near,
  The beauteous champion views with marks of fear,
  Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,
  And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
  As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees(110)
  Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees,
  Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright
  And all confused precipitates his flight:
  So from the king the shining warrior flies,
  And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.

  As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
  He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:
  "Unhappy Paris! but to women brave!(111)
  So fairly form'd, and only to deceive!
  Oh, hadst thou died when first thou saw'st the light,
  Or died at least before thy nuptial rite!
  A better fate than vainly thus to boast,
  And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host.
  Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
  Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
  Thy figure promised with a martial air,
  But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
  In former days, in all thy gallant pride,
  When thy tall ships triumphant stemm'd the tide,
  When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,
  And crowds stood wondering at the passing show,
  Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien,
  You met the approaches of the Spartan queen,
  Thus from her realm convey'd the beauteous prize,
  And both her warlike lords outshined in Helen's eyes?
  This deed, thy foes' delight, thy own disgrace,
  Thy father's grief, and ruin of thy race;
  This deed recalls thee to the proffer'd fight;
  Or hast thou injured whom thou dar'st not right?
  Soon to thy cost the field would make thee know
  Thou keep'st the consort of a braver foe.
  Thy graceful form instilling soft desire,
  Thy curling tresses, and thy silver lyre,
  Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust,
  When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust:
  Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow
  Crush the dire author of his country's woe."

  His silence here, with blushes, Paris breaks:
  "'Tis just, my brother, what your anger speaks:
  But who like thee can boast a soul sedate,
  So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate?
  Thy force, like steel, a temper'd hardness shows,
  Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows,
  Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain,
  With falling woods to strew the wasted plain.
  Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms
  With which a lover golden Venus arms;
  Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,
  No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow.
  Yet, would'st thou have the proffer'd combat stand,
  The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand;
  Then let a midway space our hosts divide,
  And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried:
  By Paris there the Spartan king be fought,
  For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought;
  And who his rival can in arms subdue,
  His be the fair, and his the treasure too.
  Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease,
  And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace;
  Thus may the Greeks review their native shore,
  Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

  He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy,
  Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
  Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe
  Advanced with steps majestically slow:
  While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour
  Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower.

  Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried:
  "Forbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside:
  A parley Hector asks, a message bears;
  We know him by the various plume he wears."
  Awed by his high command the Greeks attend,
  The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.

  While from the centre Hector rolls his eyes
  On either host, and thus to both applies:
  "Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
  What Paris, author of the war, demands.
  Your shining swords within the sheath restrain,
  And pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
  Here in the midst, in either army's sight,
  He dares the Spartan king to single fight;
  And wills that Helen and the ravish'd spoil,
  That caused the contest, shall reward the toil.
  Let these the brave triumphant victor grace,
  And different nations part in leagues of peace."

  He spoke: in still suspense on either side
  Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied:

  "Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right
  A world engages in the toils of fight.
  To me the labour of the field resign;
  Me Paris injured; all the war be mine.
  Fall he that must, beneath his rival's arms;
  And live the rest, secure of future harms.
  Two lambs, devoted by your country's rite,
  To earth a sable, to the sun a white,
  Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring
  Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
  Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,
  And add the sanction of considerate age;
  His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,
  And youth itself an empty wavering state;
  Cool age advances, venerably wise,
  Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes;
  Sees what befell, and what may yet befall,
  Concludes from both, and best provides for all.

  The nations hear with rising hopes possess'd,
  And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
  Within the lines they drew their steeds around,
  And from their chariots issued on the ground;
  Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,
  Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
  On either side the meeting hosts are seen
  With lances fix'd, and close the space between.
  Two heralds now, despatch'd to Troy, invite
  The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.

  Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring
  The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.

  Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies
  The various goddess of the rainbow flies:
  (Like fair Laodice in form and face,
  The loveliest nymph of Priam's royal race:)
  Her in the palace, at her loom she found;
  The golden web her own sad story crown'd,
  The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize)
  And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
  To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Approach, and view the wondrous scene below!(112)
  Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,
  So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,
  Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;
  Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
  Paris alone and Sparta's king advance,
  In single fight to toss the beamy lance;
  Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries,
  Thy love the motive, and thy charms the prize."

  This said, the many-coloured maid inspires
  Her husband's love, and wakes her former fires;
  Her country, parents, all that once were dear,
  Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear,
  O'er her fair face a snowy veil she threw,
  And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew.
  Her handmaids, Clymene and Ãthra, wait
  Her silent footsteps to the Scaean gate.

  There sat the seniors of the Trojan race:
  (Old Priam's chiefs, and most in Priam's grace,)
  The king the first; Thymoetes at his side;
  Lampus and Clytius, long in council tried;
  Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong;
  And next, the wisest of the reverend throng,
  Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,
  Lean'd on the walls and bask'd before the sun:
  Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage,
  But wise through time, and narrative with age,
  In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice,
  A bloodless race, that send a feeble voice.
  These, when the Spartan queen approach'd the tower,
  In secret own'd resistless beauty's power:
  They cried, "No wonder such celestial charms(113)
  For nine long years have set the world in arms;
  What winning graces! what majestic mien!
  She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen!
  Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face,
  And from destruction save the Trojan race."

  The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
  "Approach, my child, and grace thy father's side.
  See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,
  The friends and kindred of thy former years.
  No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
  Not thou, but Heaven's disposing will, the cause
  The gods these armies and this force employ,
  The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
  But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he
  (Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)
  Around whose brow such martial graces shine,
  So tall, so awful, and almost divine!
  Though some of larger stature tread the green,
  None match his grandeur and exalted mien:
  He seems a monarch, and his country's pride."
  Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied:

  "Before thy presence, father, I appear,
  With conscious shame and reverential fear.
  Ah! had I died, ere to these walk I fled,
  False to my country, and my nuptial bed;
  My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind,
  False to them all, to Paris only kind!
  For this I mourn, till grief or dire disease
  Shall waste the form whose fault it was to please!
  The king of kings, Atrides, you survey,
  Great in the war, and great in arts of sway:
  My brother once, before my days of shame!
  And oh! that still he bore a brother's name!"

  With wonder Priam view'd the godlike man,
  Extoll'd the happy prince, and thus began:
  "O bless'd Atrides! born to prosperous fate,
  Successful monarch of a mighty state!
  How vast thy empire! Of your matchless train
  What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
  In Phrygia once were gallant armies known,
  In ancient time, when Otreus fill'd the throne,
  When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse,
  And I, to join them, raised the Trojan force:
  Against the manlike Amazons we stood,(114)
  And Sangar's stream ran purple with their blood.
  But far inferior those, in martial grace,
  And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race."

  This said, once more he view'd the warrior train;
  "What's he, whose arms lie scatter'd on the plain?
  Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread,
  Though great Atrides overtops his head.
  Nor yet appear his care and conduct small;
  From rank to rank he moves, and orders all.
  The stately ram thus measures o'er the ground,
  And, master of the flock, surveys them round."

  Then Helen thus: "Whom your discerning eyes
  Have singled out, is Ithacus the wise;
  A barren island boasts his glorious birth;
  His fame for wisdom fills the spacious earth."

  Antenor took the word, and thus began:(115)
  "Myself, O king! have seen that wondrous man
  When, trusting Jove and hospitable laws,
  To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause;
  (Great Menelaus urged the same request;)
  My house was honour'd with each royal guest:
  I knew their persons, and admired their parts,
  Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts.
  Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;
  Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
  When Atreus' son harangued the listening train,
  Just was his sense, and his expression plain,
  His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;
  He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
  But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,(116)
  His modest eyes he fix'd upon the ground;
  As one unskill'd or dumb, he seem'd to stand,
  Nor raised his head, nor stretch'd his sceptred hand;
  But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
  Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,(117)
  The copious accents fall, with easy art;
  Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
  Wondering we hear, and fix'd in deep surprise,
  Our ears refute the censure of our eyes."

  The king then ask'd (as yet the camp he view'd)
  "What chief is that, with giant strength endued,
  Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,
  And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
  "Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,)
  Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
  See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
  Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers,
  Great as a god! I saw him once before,
  With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
  The rest I know, and could in order name;
  All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.
  Yet two are wanting of the numerous train,
  Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
  Castor and Pollux, first in martial force,
  One bold on foot, and one renown'd for horse.
  My brothers these; the same our native shore,
  One house contain'd us, as one mother bore.
  Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,
  For distant Troy refused to sail the seas;
  Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,
  Ashamed to combat in their sister's cause."

  So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers' doom;(118)
  Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;
  Adorn'd with honours in their native shore,
  Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.

  Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town.
  Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
  Idaeus' arms the golden goblets press'd,(119)
  Who thus the venerable king address'd:
  "Arise, O father of the Trojan state!
  The nations call, thy joyful people wait
  To seal the truce, and end the dire debate.
  Paris, thy son, and Sparta's king advance,
  In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;
  And who his rival shall in arms subdue,
  His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
  Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease,
  And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace:
  So shall the Greeks review their native shore,
  Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

  With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepare
  To join his milk-white coursers to the car;
  He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side;
  The gentle steeds through Scaea's gates they guide:(120)
  Next from the car descending on the plain,
  Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train,
  Slow they proceed: the sage Ulysses then
  Arose, and with him rose the king of men.
  On either side a sacred herald stands,
  The wine they mix, and on each monarch's hands
  Pour the full urn; then draws the Grecian lord
  His cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword;
  From the sign'd victims crops the curling hair;(121)
  The heralds part it, and the princes share;
  Then loudly thus before the attentive bands
  He calls the gods, and spreads his lifted hands:

  "O first and greatest power! whom all obey,
  Who high on Ida's holy mountain sway,
  Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that roll
  From east to west, and view from pole to pole!
  Thou mother Earth! and all ye living floods!
  Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods,
  Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
  For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
  Hear, and be witness. If, by Paris slain,
  Great Menelaus press the fatal plain;
  The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep,
  And Greece returning plough the watery deep.
  If by my brother's lance the Trojan bleed,
  Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed:
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And every age record the signal day.
  This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,
  Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field."

  With that the chief the tender victims slew,
  And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw;
  The vital spirit issued at the wound,
  And left the members quivering on the ground.
  From the same urn they drink the mingled wine,
  And add libations to the powers divine.
  While thus their prayers united mount the sky,
  "Hear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high!
  And may their blood, who first the league confound,
  Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground;
  May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust,
  And all their lust be scatter'd as the dust!"
  Thus either host their imprecations join'd,
  Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind.

  The rites now finish'd, reverend Priam rose,
  And thus express'd a heart o'ercharged with woes:
  "Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage,
  But spare the weakness of my feeble age:
  In yonder walls that object let me shun,
  Nor view the danger of so dear a son.
  Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall,
  Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all."

  This said, the hoary king no longer stay'd,
  But on his car the slaughter'd victims laid:
  Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide,
  And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.

  Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose
  The lists of combat, and the ground inclose:
  Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare,
  Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air.
  The people pray with elevated hands,
  And words like these are heard through all the bands:
  "Immortal Jove, high Heaven's superior lord,
  On lofty Ida's holy mount adored!
  Whoe'er involved us in this dire debate,
  O give that author of the war to fate
  And shades eternal! let division cease,
  And joyful nations join in leagues of peace."

  With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn
  The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn.
  Then, Paris, thine leap'd forth; by fatal chance
  Ordain'd the first to whirl the weighty lance.
  Both armies sat the combat to survey.
  Beside each chief his azure armour lay,
  And round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
  The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight,
  In gilded arms magnificently bright:
  The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around,
  With flowers adorn'd, with silver buckles bound:
  Lycaon's corslet his fair body dress'd,
  Braced in and fitted to his softer breast;
  A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
  Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
  His youthful face a polish'd helm o'erspread;
  The waving horse-hair nodded on his head:
  His figured shield, a shining orb, he takes,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes.
  With equal speed and fired by equal charms,
  The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.

  Now round the lists the admiring armies stand,
  With javelins fix'd, the Greek and Trojan band.
  Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,
  All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
  The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;
  Full on Atrides' ringing shield it flew,
  Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound(122)
  Leap'd from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.
  Atrides then his massy lance prepares,
  In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:

  "Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust,
  And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:
  Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause,
  Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
  Let this example future times reclaim,
  And guard from wrong fair friendship's holy name."
  Be said, and poised in air the javelin sent,
  Through Paris' shield the forceful weapon went,
  His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
  Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
  But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
  Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
  The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
  Broke short: the fragments glitter'd on the sand.
  The raging warrior to the spacious skies
  Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
  "Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
  And is it thus the gods assist the just?
  When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
  The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies."
  Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
  (Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
  Struggling he followed, while the embroider'd thong
  That tied his helmet, dragg'd the chief along.
  Then had his ruin crown'd Atrides' joy,
  But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
  Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
  And left an empty helmet in his hand.
  The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
  The Greeks with smiles the polish'd trophy view.
  Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart,
  In thirst of vengeance, at his rival's heart;
  The queen of love her favour'd champion shrouds
  (For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
  Raised from the field the panting youth she led,
  And gently laid him on the bridal bed,
  With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,
  And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews.
  Meantime the brightest of the female kind,
  The matchless Helen, o'er the walls reclined;
  To her, beset with Trojan beauties, came,
  In borrow'd form, the laughter-loving dame.
  (She seem'd an ancient maid, well-skill'd to cull
  The snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.)
  The goddess softly shook her silken vest,
  That shed perfumes, and whispering thus address'd:

[Illustration: VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.]

        VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.


  "Haste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,
  Safe from the fight, in yonder lofty walls,
  Fair as a god; with odours round him spread,
  He lies, and waits thee on the well-known bed;
  Not like a warrior parted from the foe,
  But some gay dancer in the public show."

  She spoke, and Helen's secret soul was moved;
  She scorn'd the champion, but the man she loved.
  Fair Venus' neck, her eyes that sparkled fire,
  And breast, reveal'd the queen of soft desire.(123)
  Struck with her presence, straight the lively red
  Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said:
  "Then is it still thy pleasure to deceive?
  And woman's frailty always to believe!
  Say, to new nations must I cross the main,
  Or carry wars to some soft Asian plain?
  For whom must Helen break her second vow?
  What other Paris is thy darling now?
  Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,)
  An odious conquest and a captive wife,
  Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear
  My absence ill, let Venus ease his care.
  A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
  Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state,
  Be fix'd for ever to the Trojan shore,
  His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more.
  For me, to lawless love no longer led,
  I scorn the coward, and detest his bed;
  Else should I merit everlasting shame,
  And keen reproach, from every Phrygian dame:
  Ill suits it now the joys of love to know,
  Too deep my anguish, and too wild my woe."

             [Illustration: VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.]

                     VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.


  Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies:
  "Obey the power from whom thy glories rise:
  Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly,
  Fade from thy cheek, and languish in thy eye.
  Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more
  The world's aversion, than their love before;
  Now the bright prize for which mankind engage,
  Than, the sad victim, of the public rage."

  At this, the fairest of her sex obey'd,
  And veil'd her blushes in a silken shade;
  Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves,
  Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
  Arrived, and enter'd at the palace gate,
  The maids officious round their mistress wait;
  Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend;
  The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.
  Full in her Paris' sight, the queen of love
  Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove;
  Where, as he view'd her charms, she turn'd away
  Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say:

  "Is this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame,
  Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
  O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword
  Of that brave man whom once I call'd my lord!
  The boaster Paris oft desired the day
  With Sparta's king to meet in single fray:
  Go now, once more thy rival's rage excite,
  Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:
  Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskill'd
  Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field."

  The prince replies: "Ah cease, divinely fair,
  Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
  This day the foe prevail'd by Pallas' power:
  We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
  There want not gods to favour us above;
  But let the business of our life be love:
  These softer moments let delights employ,
  And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
  Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's shore
  My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
  When first entranced in Cranae's isle I lay,(124)
  Mix'd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!"
  Thus having spoke, the enamour'd Phrygian boy
  Rush'd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
  Him Helen follow'd slow with bashful charms,
  And clasp'd the blooming hero in her arms.

  While these to love's delicious rapture yield,
  The stern Atrides rages round the field:
  So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
  Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
  But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
  Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
  The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
  Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
  Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crown'd,
  Our brother's arms the just success have found:
  Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor'd,
  Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And age to age record this signal day."

  He ceased; his army's loud applauses rise,
  And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.

                          [Illustration: VENUS.]

                                  VENUS.


             [Illustration: Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".]

                     Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".





BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.

THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE.

The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree upon
the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break the truce.
She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded, but
cured by Machaon. In the meantime some of the Trojan troops attack the
Greeks. Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts of a good general; he
reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some by praises and others by
reproof. Nestor is particularly celebrated for his military discipline.
The battle joins, and great numbers are slain on both sides.

The same day continues through this as through the last book (as it does
also through the two following, and almost to the end of the seventh
book). The scene is wholly in the field before Troy.

  And now Olympus' shining gates unfold;
  The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold:
  Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine,
  The golden goblet crowns with purple wine:
  While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ
  Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy.

  When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia's spleen,
  Thus waked the fury of his partial queen,
  "Two powers divine the son of Atreus aid,
  Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;(125)
  But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far,
  The tame spectators of his deeds of war.
  Not thus fair Venus helps her favour'd knight,
  The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight,
  Each danger wards, and constant in her care,
  Saves in the moment of the last despair.
  Her act has rescued Paris' forfeit life,
  Though great Atrides gain'd the glorious strife.
  Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waits
  To crown this deed, and finish all the fates!
  Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare,
  Or rouse the furies, and awake the war?
  Yet, would the gods for human good provide,
  Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride,
  Still Priam's walls in peaceful honours grow,
  And through his gates the crowding nations flow."

  Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged,
  And queen of war, in close consult engaged:
  Apart they sit, their deep designs employ,
  And meditate the future woes of Troy.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath suppress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of passion, broke
  Her sullen silence, and with fury spoke:

                 [Illustration: THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.]

                         THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.


  "Shall then, O tyrant of the ethereal reign!
  My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?
  Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms,
  Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
  To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore;
  The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.
  At length ripe vengeance o'er their heads impends,
  But Jove himself the faithless race defends.
  Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust,
  Not all the gods are partial and unjust."

  The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,
  Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies:
  "Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate
  To Phrygia's monarch, and the Phrygian state!
  What high offence has fired the wife of Jove?
  Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,
  That Troy, and Troy's whole race thou wouldst confound,
  And yon fair structures level with the ground!
  Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,
  Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire!
  Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,
  Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore:
  To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,
  Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
  So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,(126)
  When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.
  But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate
  On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate;
  Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,
  Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
  For know, of all the numerous towns that rise
  Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies,
  Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,
  None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
  No mortals merit more distinguish'd grace
  Than godlike Priam, or than Priam's race.
  Still to our name their hecatombs expire,
  And altars blaze with unextinguish'd fire."

  At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes,
  Then on the Thunderer fix'd them, and replies:
  "Three towns are Juno's on the Grecian plains,
  More dear than all the extended earth contains,
  Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;(127)

  These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:
  'Tis not in me the vengeance to remove;
  The crime's sufficient that they share my love.
  Of power superior why should I complain?
  Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
  Yet some distinction Juno might require,
  Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire,
  A goddess born, to share the realms above,
  And styled the consort of the thundering Jove;
  Nor thou a wife and sister's right deny;(128)
  Let both consent, and both by terms comply;
  So shall the gods our joint decrees obey,
  And heaven shall act as we direct the way.
  See ready Pallas waits thy high commands
  To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;
  Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease,
  And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace."

  The sire of men and monarch of the sky
  The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
  Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ
  To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
  Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight,
  And shot like lightning from Olympus' height.
  As the red comet, from Saturnius sent
  To fright the nations with a dire portent,
  (A fatal sign to armies on the plain,
  Or trembling sailors on the wintry main,)
  With sweeping glories glides along in air,
  And shakes the sparkles from its blazing hair:(129)
  Between both armies thus, in open sight
  Shot the bright goddess in a trail of light,
  With eyes erect the gazing hosts admire
  The power descending, and the heavens on fire!
  "The gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent,
  And fate now labours with some vast event:
  Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares;
  Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars."

  They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng,
  (In shape a mortal,) pass'd disguised along.
  Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent,
  Who from Antenor traced his high descent.
  Amidst the ranks Lycaon's son she found,
  The warlike Pandarus, for strength renown'd;
  Whose squadrons, led from black Ãsepus' flood,(130)
  With flaming shields in martial circle stood.
  To him the goddess: "Phrygian! canst thou hear
  A well-timed counsel with a willing ear?
  What praise were thine, couldst thou direct thy dart,
  Amidst his triumph, to the Spartan's heart?
  What gifts from Troy, from Paris wouldst thou gain,
  Thy country's foe, the Grecian glory slain?
  Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed,
  Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed!
  But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow
  To Lycian Phoebus with the silver bow,
  And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay,
  On Zelia's altars, to the god of day."(131)

  He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,
  His polish'd bow with hasty rashness seized.
  'Twas form'd of horn, and smooth'd with artful toil:
  A mountain goat resign'd the shining spoil.
  Who pierced long since beneath his arrows bled;
  The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead,
  And sixteen palms his brow's large honours spread:
  The workmen join'd, and shaped the bended horns,
  And beaten gold each taper point adorns.
  This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends,
  Screen'd by the shields of his surrounding friends:
  There meditates the mark; and couching low,
  Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
  One from a hundred feather'd deaths he chose,
  Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
  Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
  Apollo's altars in his native town.

  Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
  Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
  Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
  Till the barb'd points approach the circling bow;
  The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
  Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

  But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
  The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
  Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
  Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
  So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
  The watchful mother wafts the envenom'd fly.
  Just where his belt with golden buckles join'd,
  Where linen folds the double corslet lined,
  She turn'd the shaft, which, hissing from above,
  Pass'd the broad belt, and through the corslet drove;
  The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,
  And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore.
  As when some stately trappings are decreed
  To grace a monarch on his bounding steed,
  A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred,
  Stains the pure ivory with a lively red;
  With equal lustre various colours vie,
  The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:
  So great Atrides! show'd thy sacred blood,
  As down thy snowy thigh distill'd the streaming flood.
  With horror seized, the king of men descried
  The shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing tide:
  Nor less the Spartan fear'd, before he found
  The shining barb appear above the wound,
  Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast,
  The royal brother thus his grief express'd,
  And grasp'd his hand; while all the Greeks around
  With answering sighs return'd the plaintive sound.

  "Oh, dear as life! did I for this agree
  The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
  Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train,
  To fight for Greece, and conquer, to be slain!
  The race of Trojans in thy ruin join,
  And faith is scorn'd by all the perjured line.
  Not thus our vows, confirm'd with wine and gore,
  Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore,
  Shall all be vain: when Heaven's revenge is slow,
  Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.
  The day shall come, that great avenging day,
  When Troy's proud glories in the dust shall lay,
  When Priam's powers and Priam's self shall fall,
  And one prodigious ruin swallow all.
  I see the god, already, from the pole
  Bare his red arm, and bid the thunder roll;
  I see the Eternal all his fury shed,
  And shake his aegis o'er their guilty head.
  Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait;
  But thou, alas! deserv'st a happier fate.
  Still must I mourn the period of thy days,
  And only mourn, without my share of praise?
  Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more
  Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore;
  Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost,
  Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast;
  While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries,
  (And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,)
  'Such are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings,
  And such the conquest of her king of kings!
  Lo his proud vessels scatter'd o'er the main,
  And unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.'
  Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
  O'erwhelm me, earth! and hide a monarch's shame."

  He said: a leader's and a brother's fears
  Possess his soul, which thus the Spartan cheers:
  "Let not thy words the warmth of Greece abate;
  The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate:
  Stiff with the rich embroider'd work around,
  My varied belt repell'd the flying wound."

  To whom the king: "My brother and my friend,
  Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!
  Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art
  May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
  Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring
  His speedy succour to the Spartan king;
  Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),
  The Grecian's sorrow, and the Dardan's joy."

  With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
  Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes,
  And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands(132)
  In arms incircled with his native bands.
  Then thus: "Machaon, to the king repair,
  His wounded brother claims thy timely care;
  Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
  A grief to us, a triumph to the foe."

  The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man
  Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
  The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
  And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
  Where to the steely point the reed was join'd,
  The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
  Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
  He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
  Then suck'd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,(133)
  Which Chiron gave, and Ãsculapius used.

  While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
  The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
  Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
  Once more the fields are fill'd with dire alarms.
  Nor had you seen the king of men appear
  Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
  But fond of glory, with severe delight,
  His beating bosom claim'd the rising fight.
  No longer with his warlike steeds he stay'd,
  Or press'd the car with polish'd brass inlaid
  But left Eurymedon the reins to guide;
  The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
  On foot through all the martial ranks he moves
  And these encourages, and those reproves.
  "Brave men!" he cries, (to such who boldly dare
  Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war),
  "Your ancient valour on the foes approve;
  Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
  'Tis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread,
  Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;
  Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains,
  And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains."

  Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;
  Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires:
  "Shame to your country, scandal of your kind;
  Born to the fate ye well deserve to find!
  Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,
  Prepared for flight, but doom'd to fly in vain?
  Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer
  Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
  Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire,
  Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire?
  Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase,
  To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?"

  This said, he stalk'd with ample strides along,
  To Crete's brave monarch and his martial throng;
  High at their head he saw the chief appear,
  And bold Meriones excite the rear.
  At this the king his generous joy express'd,
  And clasp'd the warrior to his armed breast.
  "Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe
  To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow?
  To thee the foremost honours are decreed,
  First in the fight and every graceful deed.
  For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls
  Restore our blood, and raise the warriors' souls,
  Though all the rest with stated rules we bound,
  Unmix'd, unmeasured, are thy goblets crown'd.
  Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name;
  Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame."
  To whom the Cretan thus his speech address'd:
  "Secure of me, O king! exhort the rest.
  Fix'd to thy side, in every toil I share,
  Thy firm associate in the day of war.
  But let the signal be this moment given;
  To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven.
  The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,
  And chains or death avenge the impious deed."

  Charm'd with this heat, the king his course pursues,
  And next the troops of either Ajax views:
  In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,
  A cloud of heroes blacken'd all the ground.
  Thus from the lofty promontory's brow
  A swain surveys the gathering storm below;
  Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise,
  Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,
  Till black as night the swelling tempest shows,
  The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:
  He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock
  To the close covert of an arching rock.

  Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,
  With spears erect, a moving iron wood:
  A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,
  And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.

  "O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,
  Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain,
  (Exclaim'd the king), who raise your eager bands
  With great examples, more than loud commands.
  Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest
  Such souls as burn in your exalted breast,
  Soon should our arms with just success be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie smoking on the ground."

  Then to the next the general bends his course;
  (His heart exults, and glories in his force);
  There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,
  And with inspiring eloquence commands;
  With strictest order sets his train in arms,
  The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.
  Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait,
  Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
  The horse and chariots to the front assign'd,
  The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;
  The middle space suspected troops supply,
  Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;
  He gives command to "curb the fiery steed,
  Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks exceed:
  Before the rest let none too rashly ride;
  No strength nor skill, but just in time, be tried:
  The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein,
  But fight, or fall; a firm embodied train.
  He whom the fortune of the field shall cast
  From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste;
  Nor seek unpractised to direct the car,
  Content with javelins to provoke the war.
  Our great forefathers held this prudent course,
  Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force;
  By laws like these immortal conquests made,
  And earth's proud tyrants low in ashes laid."

  So spoke the master of the martial art,
  And touch'd with transport great Atrides' heart.
  "Oh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires,
  And nerves to second what thy soul inspires!
  But wasting years, that wither human race,
  Exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace.
  What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!
  And age the lot of any chief but thee."

  Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried;
  He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied:
  "Well might I wish, could mortal wish renew(134)
  That strength which once in boiling youth I knew;
  Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain
  Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.
  But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows,
  These years with wisdom crowns, with action those:
  The field of combat fits the young and bold,
  The solemn council best becomes the old:
  To you the glorious conflict I resign,
  Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine."

  He said. With joy the monarch march'd before,
  And found Menestheus on the dusty shore,
  With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands;
  And next Ulysses, with his subject bands.
  Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far
  The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war;
  The tumult late begun, they stood intent
  To watch the motion, dubious of the event.
  The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved,
  With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:

  "Can Peleus' son forget a warrior's part.
  And fears Ulysses, skill'd in every art?
  Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
  To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
  From you 'twas hoped among the first to dare
  The shock of armies, and commence the war;
  For this your names are call'd before the rest,
  To share the pleasures of the genial feast:
  And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey
  Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
  Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
  The first in banquets, but the last in fight."

  Ulysses heard: the hero's warmth o'erspread
  His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:
  "Take back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand
  Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
  If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight,
  Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
  Then give thy warrior-chief a warrior's due,
  Who dares to act whate'er thou dar'st to view."
  Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:

  "O great in action, and in council wise!
  With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,
  Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame.
  Sage as thou art, and learn'd in human kind,
  Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
  Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;
  The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends."

  He said, and pass'd where great Tydides lay,
  His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;
  (The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)(135)
  To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:
  "O son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame
  The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name)
  Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
  With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
  Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear'd;
  Still first in front the matchless prince appear'd:
  What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
  Who view'd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
  I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
  A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenae's towers;
  Armies he ask'd, and armies had been given,
  Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
  While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
  Forewarn'd the horrors of the Theban war.(136)
  Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
  A fearless envoy, he approach'd the foes;
  Thebes' hostile walls unguarded and alone,
  Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
  The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
  And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
  Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
  For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
  Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
  To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
  Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
  Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
  Those fifty slaughter'd in the gloomy vale.
  He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
  Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
  Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!"

  No words the godlike Diomed return'd,
  But heard respectful, and in secret burn'd:
  Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted son;
  Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

  "What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
  Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
  Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
  Our value equal, though our fury less.
  With fewer troops we storm'd the Theban wall,
  And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,(137)
  In impious acts the guilty father died;
  The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
  Far more than heirs of all our parents' fame,
  Our glories darken their diminish'd name."

  To him Tydides thus: "My friend, forbear;
  Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:
  His high concern may well excuse this rage,
  Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:
  His the first praise, were Ilion's towers o'erthrown,
  And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
  Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,
  'Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight."

  He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground
  Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
  Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,
  Of arm'd Tydides rushing to the war.
  As when the winds, ascending by degrees,(138)
  First move the whitening surface of the seas,
  The billows float in order to the shore,
  The wave behind rolls on the wave before;
  Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise,
  Foam o'er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
  So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
  Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along
  Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
  No sound, no whisper, but the chief's commands,
  Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,
  As if some god had snatch'd their voice away.
  Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends
  A general shout that all the region rends.
  As when the fleecy flocks unnumber'd stand
  In wealthy folds, and wait the milker's hand,
  The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
  The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills:
  Such clamours rose from various nations round,
  Mix'd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
  Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
  These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,
  Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign;
  And discord raging bathes the purple plain;
  Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power,
  Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
  While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,
  She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;(139)
  The nations bleed, where'er her steps she turns,
  The groan still deepens, and the combat burns.

  Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
  To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
  Victors and vanquish'd join'd promiscuous cries,
  And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
  With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
  Rush to the vales, and pour'd along the plain.
  Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
  The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
  So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

  The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
  The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
  At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
  Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
  Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
  And shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
  So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
  Of force and fire, its walls besmear'd with blood.
  Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,(140)
  Seized to despoil, and dragg'd the corpse along:
  But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
  Agenor's javelin reach'd the hero's heart.
  His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
  Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
  The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
  The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
  Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
  The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
  As o'er their prey rapacious wolves engage,
  Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

  In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
  Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
  Amid the flocks on silver Simois' shore:
  The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
  To seek her parents on his flowery side,
  Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
  And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
  Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
  He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
  So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
  Raised high the head, with stately branches crown'd,
  (Fell'd by some artist with his shining steel,
  To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)
  Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
  With all its beauteous honours on its head
  There, left a subject to the wind and rain,
  And scorch'd by suns, it withers on the plain
  Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
  Stretch'd on the shore, and thus neglected dies.

  At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;
  The pointed lance with erring fury flew,
  And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
  He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain,
  And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
  This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged,
  Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged;
  Arm'd with his spear, he meditates the wound,
  In act to throw; but cautious look'd around,
  Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,
  And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
  A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came,
  Old Priam's son, Democoon was his name.
  The weapon entered close above his ear,
  Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;(141)
  With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath,
  His eye-balls darken with the shades of death;
  Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler rings against the ground.

  Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;
  E'en godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
  Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
  The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
  But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height
  Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.
  "Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
  Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
  Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;
  Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
  Have ye forgot what seem'd your dread before?
  The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more."

  Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty towers,
  Array'd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
  While war's fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
  And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
  Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
  In vain his valour and illustrious line.
  A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
  (Who from cold Ãnus led the Thracian crew,)(142)
  Full on his ankle dropp'd the ponderous stone,
  Burst the strong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone.
  Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
  Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
  And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
  The foe rush'd furious as he pants for breath,
  And through his navel drove the pointed death:
  His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
  And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

  His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
  Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
  Amid the lungs was fix'd the winged wood,
  And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
  Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
  The Ãtolian warrior tugg'd his weighty spear:
  Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
  And gash'd his belly with a ghastly wound;
  The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
  To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
  The Thracian bands against the victor press'd,
  A grove of lances glitter'd at his breast.
  Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
  In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

  Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
  And one the leader of the Epeian race;
  Death's sable shade at once o'ercast their eyes,
  In dust the vanquish'd and the victor lies.
  With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
  And heap'd with growing mountains of the dead.

  Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
  By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
  Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
  And swords around him innocently play;
  The war's whole art with wonder had he seen,
  And counted heroes where he counted men.

  So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
  And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

                [Illustration: Map of the Plain of Troy.]

                        Map of the Plain of Troy.





BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.

THE ACTS OF DIOMED.

Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day's battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables him
to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending with any
of the former, excepting Venus. Ãneas joins Pandarus to oppose him;
Pandarus is killed, and Ãneas in great danger but for the assistance of
Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is wounded on the
hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at length carries
off Ãneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of Pergamus. Mars
rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a stand. In the meantime
Ãneas is restored to the field, and they overthrow several of the Greeks;
among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon. Juno and Minerva descend
to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to go against that god; he
wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven.

The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same as in
the former.

  But Pallas now Tydides' soul inspires,(143)
  Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,
  Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise,
  And crown her hero with distinguish'd praise.
  High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
  His beamy shield emits a living ray;
  The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
  Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies,
  When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,
  And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
  Such glories Pallas on the chief bestow'd,
  Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow'd:
  Onward she drives him, furious to engage,
  Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.

  The sons of Dares first the combat sought,
  A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault;
  In Vulcan's fane the father's days were led,
  The sons to toils of glorious battle bred;
  These singled from their troops the fight maintain,
  These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
  Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,
  And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its erring force.
  Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain,
  But pierced his breast, and stretch'd him on the plain.
  Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled,
  Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
  And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,
  He too had sunk to death's eternal shade;
  But in a smoky cloud the god of fire
  Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
  The steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
  Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

  Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
  Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
  When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
  The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

  "Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
  Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
  Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  While we from interdicted fields retire,
  Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

  Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
  The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
  Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
  They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

  Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
  And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
  First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
  His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

  As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
  The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
  In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
  His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

  Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
  The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
  Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
  From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
  The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
  And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
  And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

  Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
  In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
  Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
  But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
  The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
  From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
  Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
  Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
  Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was thine,
  The graceful fabric and the fair design;
  For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
  To him the shipwright's and the builder's art.
  Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
  The fatal cause of all his country's woes;
  But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,
  Nor saw his country's peril, nor his own.
  The hapless artist, while confused he fled,
  The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast,
  Between the bladder and the bone it pass'd;
  Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries,
  And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.

  From Meges' force the swift Pedaeus fled,
  Antenor's offspring from a foreign bed,
  Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,
  Nursed the young stranger with a mother's care.
  How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear
  Full in his nape infix'd the fatal spear;
  Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,
  And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.

  Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,
  Sprung from the brave Dolopion's mighty line,
  Who near adored Scamander made abode,
  Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
  On him, amidst the flying numbers found,
  Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;
  On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand,
  Thence glancing downwards, lopp'd his holy hand,
  Which stain'd with sacred blood the blushing sand.
  Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death
  Closed his dim eye, and fate suppress'd his breath.

  Thus toil'd the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
  In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;
  Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train,
  Rapt through the ranks he thunders o'er the plain;
  Now here, now there, he darts from place to place,
  Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
  Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong
  Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along,
  Through ruin'd moles the rushing wave resounds,
  O'erwhelm's the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;
  The yellow harvests of the ripen'd year,
  And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear!(144)
  While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain,
  And all the labours of mankind are vain.

  So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
  Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
  With grief the leader of the Lycian band
  Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
  His bended bow against the chief he drew;
  Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
  Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
  Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
  The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
  While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

  "Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
  Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
  Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
  Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain."
  So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
  Stopp'd short of life, and mock'd the shooter's art.
  The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
  The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
  Swift from his seat he leap'd upon the ground,
  And tugg'd the weapon from the gushing wound;
  When thus the king his guardian power address'd,
  The purple current wandering o'er his vest:

  "O progeny of Jove! unconquer'd maid!
  If e'er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
  If e'er I felt thee in the fighting field;
  Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
  O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
  Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard'st in fight;
  And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
  That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more."

  Thus pray'd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
  His nerves confirm'd, his languid spirits cheer'd;
  He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
  His beating bosom claim'd the promised fight.
  "Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
  War be thy province, thy protection mine;
  Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
  Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
  Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
  And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
  Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,(145)
  And set to view the warring deities.
  These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;
  Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
  If Venus mingle in the martial band,
  Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command."

  With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing'd her flight;
  The hero rush'd impetuous to the fight;
  With tenfold ardour now invades the plain,
  Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
  As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls,
  Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;
  If chance some shepherd with a distant dart
  The savage wound, he rouses at the smart,
  He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay,
  But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;
  Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,
  Then leaps victorious o'er the lofty mound.
  Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;
  And two brave leaders at an instant slew;
  Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,
  His people's pastor, good Hypenor, died;
  Astynous' breast the deadly lance receives,
  Hypenor's shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
  Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage
  Abas and Polyidus to engage;
  Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,
  Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold;
  The youths return'd not from the doubtful plain,
  And the sad father tried his arts in vain;
  No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
  Though now determined by Tydides' spear.

  Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage;
  The joy and hope of Phaenops' feeble age:
  Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs
  Of all his labours and a life of cares.
  Cold death o'ertakes them in their blooming years,
  And leaves the father unavailing tears:
  To strangers now descends his heapy store,
  The race forgotten, and the name no more.

  Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride,
  Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
  As when the lordly lion seeks his food
  Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood,
  He leaps amidst them with a furious bound,
  Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
  So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
  Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

  With deep concern divine Ãneas view'd
  The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
  Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
  Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
  At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

  "Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
  Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
  Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
  And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
  O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
  That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
  Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
  (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
  For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
  Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
  If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

  To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
  If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
  Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
  So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
  If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
  Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
  Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
  And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
  I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
  The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
  And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unerring hands.
  Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
  Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
  Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
  And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
  There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
  And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
  The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
  When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
  In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
  And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
  But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
  I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
  And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown)
  Might fail of forage in the straiten'd town;
  So took my bow and pointed darts in hand
  And left the chariots in my native land.

  "Too late, O friend! my rashness I deplore;
  These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
  Tydeus' and Atreus' sons their points have found,
  And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
  In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow
  Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
  In evil hour these bended horns I strung,
  And seized the quiver where it idly hung.
  Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field
  Without a warrior's arms, the spear and shield!
  If e'er with life I quit the Trojan plain,
  If e'er I see my spouse and sire again,
  This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,
  Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames."

  To whom the leader of the Dardan race:
  "Be calm, nor Phoebus' honour'd gift disgrace.
  The distant dart be praised, though here we need
  The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
  Against yon hero let us bend our course,
  And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
  Now mount my seat, and from the chariot's height
  Observe my father's steeds, renown'd in fight;
  Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
  To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race;
  Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;
  Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
  Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;
  The warrior's fury let this arm sustain;
  Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,
  Take thou the spear, the chariot's care be mine."

  "O prince! (Lycaon's valiant son replied)
  As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
  The horses, practised to their lord's command,
  Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;
  But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight,
  Thy voice alone can animate their flight;
  Else shall our fates be number'd with the dead,
  And these, the victor's prize, in triumph led.
  Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield
  Myself will charge this terror of the field."

  And now both heroes mount the glittering car;
  The bounding coursers rush amidst the war;
  Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,
  Who thus, alarm'd, to great Tydides cried:

  "O friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,
  Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee:
  Lo the brave heir of old Lycaon's line,
  And great Ãneas, sprung from race divine!
  Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!
  And save a life, the bulwark of our war."

  At this the hero cast a gloomy look,
  Fix'd on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:

  "Me dost thou bid to shun the coming fight?
  Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
  Know, 'tis not honest in my soul to fear,
  Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.
  I hate the cumbrous chariot's slow advance,
  And the long distance of the flying lance;
  But while my nerves are strong, my force entire,
  Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
  Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey
  Those threatening heroes, bear them both away;
  One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;
  So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
  But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,
  That both shall fall by one victorious hand,
  Then heed my words: my horses here detain,
  Fix'd to the chariot by the straiten'd rein;
  Swift to Ãneas' empty seat proceed,
  And seize the coursers of ethereal breed;
  The race of those, which once the thundering god(146)
  For ravish'd Ganymede on Tros bestow'd,
  The best that e'er on earth's broad surface run,
  Beneath the rising or the setting sun.
  Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown,
  By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:
  Four of this race his ample stalls contain,
  And two transport Ãneas o'er the plain.
  These, were the rich immortal prize our own,
  Through the wide world should make our glory known."

  Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,
  And stern Lycaon's warlike race begun:

  "Prince, thou art met. Though late in vain assail'd,
  The spear may enter where the arrow fail'd."

  He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung;
  On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,
  Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung,
  "He bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)
  Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!"
  "Mistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)
  Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;
  Ye 'scape not both; one, headlong from his car,
  With hostile blood shall glut the god of war."

  He spoke, and rising hurl'd his forceful dart,
  Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;
  Full in his face it enter'd, and betwixt
  The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fix'd;
  Crash'd all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,
  Till the bright point look'd out beneath the chin.
  Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground:
  Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;
  The starting coursers tremble with affright;
  The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.

  To guard his slaughter'd friend, Ãneas flies,
  His spear extending where the carcase lies;
  Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,
  As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
  O'er the fall'n trunk his ample shield display'd,
  He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
  And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
  Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
  Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
  Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:(147)
  He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
  Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
  Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
  Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
  Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
  And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
  Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
  His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
  Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
  A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
  There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
  Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
  But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
  She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
  His danger views with anguish and despair,
  And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
  About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
  Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
  Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
  The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
  Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
  Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

  Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
  Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
  His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
  He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
  Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
  The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
  These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
  No longer now a Trojan lord obey'd.
  That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
  (Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
  Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
  And follow'd where Tydides swept the plain.

  Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
  The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
  No goddess she, commission'd to the field,
  Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,
  Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall,
  While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;
  He knew soft combats suit the tender dame,
  New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
  Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends,
  And at the goddess his broad lance extends;
  Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove,
  The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove;
  Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,
  And the transparent skin with crimson stain'd,
  From the clear vein a stream immortal flow'd,
  Such stream as issues from a wounded god;(148)
  Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!
  Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:
  (For not the bread of man their life sustains,
  Nor wine's inflaming juice supplies their veins:)
  With tender shrieks the goddess fill'd the place,
  And dropp'd her offspring from her weak embrace.
  Him Phoebus took: he casts a cloud around
  The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.

  Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,
  The king insults the goddess as she flies:
  "Ill with Jove's daughter bloody fights agree,
  The field of combat is no scene for thee:
  Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,
  Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
  Taught by this stroke renounce the war's alarms,
  And learn to tremble at the name of arms."

  Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread,
  Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
  To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew,
  Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.
  The queen of love with faded charms she found.
  Pale was her cheek, and livid look'd the wound.
  To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:
  Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay;
  Beside him stood his lance, distain'd with gore,
  And, rein'd with gold, his foaming steeds before.
  Low at his knee, she begg'd with streaming eyes
  Her brother's car, to mount the distant skies,
  And show'd the wound by fierce Tydides given,
  A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
  Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
  And to her hand commits the golden rein;
  She mounts the seat, oppress'd with silent woe,
  Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
  The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
  And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
  They stopp'd the car, and there the coursers stood,
  Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
  Before her mother, love's bright queen appears,
  O'erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
  She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
  And ask'd what god had wrought this guilty deed?

  [Illustration: VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.]

          VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.


  Then she: "This insult from no god I found,
  An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
  Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
  'Twas in the son's defence the mother bled.
  The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
  But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage."

  Dione then: "Thy wrongs with patience bear,
  And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
  Unnumber'd woes mankind from us sustain,
  And men with woes afflict the gods again.
  The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,(149)
  And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
  Full thirteen moons imprison'd roar'd in vain;
  Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
  Perhaps had perish'd had not Hermes' care
  Restored the groaning god to upper air.
  Great Juno's self has borne her weight of pain,
  The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
  Amphitryon's son infix'd the deadly dart,(150)
  And fill'd with anguish her immortal heart.
  E'en hell's grim king Alcides' power confess'd,
  The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
  To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
  Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
  Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
  Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
  Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
  And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!

         [Illustration: OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.]

                 OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.


  "But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
  Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
  Know thou, whoe'er with heavenly power contends,
  Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
  From fields of death when late he shall retire,
  No infant on his knees shall call him sire.
  Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,
  To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground;
  Thy distant wife, Ãgiale the fair,(151)
  Starting from sleep with a distracted air,
  Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore,
  The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!"

  This said, she wiped from Venus' wounded palm
  The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
  Juno and Pallas with a smile survey'd,
  And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:

  "Permit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell
  How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,
  As late she tried with passion to inflame
  The tender bosom of a Grecian dame;
  Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,
  To quit her country for some youth of Troy;
  The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,
  Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound."

  The sire of gods and men superior smiled,
  And, calling Venus, thus address'd his child:
  "Not these, O daughter are thy proper cares,
  Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
  Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
  To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms."

  Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below
  The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,
  Flush'd with celestial blood pursued his way,
  And fearless dared the threatening god of day;
  Already in his hopes he saw him kill'd,
  Though screen'd behind Apollo's mighty shield.
  Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook;
  His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook:
  He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see
  How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
  Distance immense! between the powers that shine
  Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
  And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
  A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth."

  So spoke the god who darts celestial fires:
  He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
  Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venus' race
  To Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
  Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
  With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
  This done, the patron of the silver bow
  A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
  With great Ãneas; such the form he bore,
  And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
  Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
  And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
  Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
  And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

  "Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
  Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
  Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
  Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
  First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
  Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
  The wretch would brave high heaven's immortal sire,
  His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire."

  The god of battle issues on the plain,
  Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
  In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
  Enraged to Troy's retiring chiefs he cried:

  "How long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,
  And unrevenged see Priam's people die?
  Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,
  And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
  Lo, brave Ãneas sinks beneath his wound,
  Not godlike Hector more in arms renown'd:
  Haste all, and take the generous warrior's part.
  He said;--new courage swell'd each hero's heart.
  Sarpedon first his ardent soul express'd,
  And, turn'd to Hector, these bold words address'd:

  "Say, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
  Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,
  That propp'd alone by Priam's race should stand
  Troy's sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
  Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,
  And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
  Remote they stand while alien troops engage,
  Like trembling hounds before the lion's rage.
  Far distant hence I held my wide command,
  Where foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land;
  With ample wealth (the wish of mortals) bless'd,
  A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast;
  With those I left whatever dear could be:
  Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me;
  Yet first in fight my Lycian bands I cheer,
  And long to meet this mighty man ye fear;
  While Hector idle stands, nor bids the brave
  Their wives, their infants, and their altars save.
  Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threaten'd state,
  Or one vast burst of all-involving fate
  Full o'er your towers shall fall, and sweep away
  Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguish'd prey.
  Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight;
  These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night;
  With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose;
  Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes."

  Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears,
  But just reproof with decent silence bears.
  From his proud car the prince impetuous springs,
  On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings.
  Two shining spears are brandish'd in his hands;
  Thus arm'd, he animates his drooping bands,
  Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
  And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
  They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare,
  Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.

  As when, on Ceres' sacred floor, the swain
  Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain,
  And the light chaff, before the breezes borne,
  Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn;
  The grey dust, rising with collected winds,
  Drives o'er the barn, and whitens all the hinds:
  So white with dust the Grecian host appears.
  From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers;
  The dusky clouds from labour'd earth arise,
  And roll in smoking volumes to the skies.
  Mars hovers o'er them with his sable shield,
  And adds new horrors to the darken'd field:
  Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
  In Troy's defence, Apollo's heavenly will:
  Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires,
  Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires.
  And now the god, from forth his sacred fane,
  Produced Ãneas to the shouting train;
  Alive, unharm'd, with all his peers around,
  Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound:
  Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day
  No pause of words admits, no dull delay;
  Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,
  Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the field's in flames.

  Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood,
  And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
  Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train
  The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
  Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait
  Serenely dreadful, and as fix'd as fate.
  So when the embattled clouds in dark array,
  Along the skies their gloomy lines display;
  When now the North his boisterous rage has spent,
  And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:
  The low-hung vapours, motionless and still,
  Rest on the summits of the shaded hill;
  Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,
  Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.

  Nor was the general wanting to his train;
  From troop to troop he toils through all the plain,
  "Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;
  Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
  Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire,
  And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
  On valour's side the odds of combat lie,
  The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
  The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
  Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!"

  These words he seconds with his flying lance,
  To meet whose point was strong Deicoon's chance:
  Ãneas' friend, and in his native place
  Honour'd and loved like Priam's royal race:
  Long had he fought the foremost in the field,
  But now the monarch's lance transpierced his shield:
  His shield too weak the furious dart to stay,
  Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:
  The grisly wound dismiss'd his soul to hell,
  His arms around him rattled as he fell.

  Then fierce Ãneas, brandishing his blade,
  In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,
  Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great,
  In well-built Pherae held his lofty seat:(152)
  Sprung from Alpheus' plenteous stream, that yields
  Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
  He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,
  And these descended in the third degree.
  Too early expert in the martial toil,
  In sable ships they left their native soil,
  To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain,
  They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain.
  So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood
  In deep recesses of the gloomy wood,
  Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontroll'd
  Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold:
  Till pierced at distance from their native den,
  O'erpowered they fall beneath the force of men.
  Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay,
  Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.
  Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes,
  Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies;
  Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate,
  The god but urged him to provoke his fate.
  He thus advancing, Nestor's valiant son
  Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own;
  Struck with the thought, should Helen's lord be slain,
  And all his country's glorious labours vain.
  Already met, the threatening heroes stand;
  The spears already tremble in their hand:
  In rush'd Antilochus, his aid to bring,
  And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.
  These seen, the Dardan backward turn'd his course,
  Brave as he was, and shunn'd unequal force.
  The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew,
  Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.

  First, Pylaemenes, great in battle, bled,
  Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
  Atrides mark'd him where sublime he stood;
  Fix'd in his throat the javelin drank his blood.
  The faithful Mydon, as he turn'd from fight
  His flying coursers, sunk to endless night;
  A broken rock by Nestor's son was thrown:
  His bended arm received the falling stone;
  From his numb'd hand the ivory-studded reins,
  Dropp'd in the dust, are trail'd along the plains:
  Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly wound;
  He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground:
  Deep drove his helmet in the sands, and there
  The head stood fix'd, the quivering legs in air,
  Till trampled flat beneath the coursers' feet:
  The youthful victor mounts his empty seat,
  And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet.

  Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view,
  Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue:
  He fires his host with animating cries,
  And brings along the furies of the skies,
  Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread,
  Flame in the front, and thunder at their head:
  This swells the tumult and the rage of fight;
  That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light.
  Where Hector march'd, the god of battles shined,
  Now storm'd before him, and now raged behind.

  Tydides paused amidst his full career;
  Then first the hero's manly breast knew fear.
  As when some simple swain his cot forsakes,
  And wide through fens an unknown journey takes:
  If chance a swelling brook his passage stay,
  And foam impervious 'cross the wanderer's way,
  Confused he stops, a length of country pass'd,
  Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.
  Amazed no less the great Tydides stands:
  He stay'd, and turning thus address'd his bands:

  "No wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield;
  Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field;
  His strokes they second, and avert our spears.
  Behold where Mars in mortal arms appears!
  Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow;
  Retire, but with your faces to the foe.
  Trust not too much your unavailing might;
  'Tis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight."

  Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew;
  And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:
  His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found,
  In every art of glorious war renown'd;
  In the same car the chiefs to combat ride,
  And fought united, and united died.
  Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows
  With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
  His massy spear with matchless fury sent,
  Through Amphius' belt and heaving belly went;
  Amphius Apaesus' happy soil possess'd,
  With herds abounding, and with treasure bless'd;
  But fate resistless from his country led
  The chief, to perish at his people's head.
  Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung,
  And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung;
  Around his head an iron tempest rain'd;
  A wood of spears his ample shield sustain'd:
  Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press'd,
  And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast:
  He could no more; the showering darts denied
  To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
  Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields,
  With bristling lances, and compacted shields;
  Till in the steely circle straiten'd round,
  Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.

  While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,(153)
  Urged by the force of unresisted fate,
  Burns with desire Sarpedon's strength to prove;
  Alcides' offspring meets the son of Jove.
  Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
  Jove's great descendant, and his greater son.
  Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss'd,
  The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:

  "What brings this Lycian counsellor so far,
  To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
  Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move,
  Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
  How far unlike those chiefs of race divine,
  How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
  Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul
  No fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell control.
  Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand
  Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand:
  With six small ships, and but a slender train,
  He left the town a wide-deserted plain.
  But what art thou, who deedless look'st around,
  While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!
  Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can be;
  But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me.
  Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
  I make this present to the shades below."

  The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide,
  Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied:

  "Thy sire, O prince! o'erturn'd the Trojan state,
  Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate;
  Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far,
  False he detain'd, the just reward of war.
  Nor so content, the generous chief defied,
  With base reproaches and unmanly pride.
  But you, unworthy the high race you boast,
  Shall raise my glory when thy own is lost:
  Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,
  Add one more ghost to Pluto's gloomy reign."

  He said: both javelins at an instant flew;
  Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedon's slew:
  Full in the boaster's neck the weapon stood,
  Transfix'd his throat, and drank the vital blood;
  The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night,
  And his seal'd eyes for ever lose the light.

  Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown
  Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone
  Sarpedon's thigh, had robb'd the chief of breath;
  But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
  Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,
  The wounded hero dragg'd the lance along.
  (His friends, each busied in his several part,
  Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.)
  The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;
  Whose fall Ulysses view'd, with fury fired;
  Doubtful if Jove's great son he should pursue,
  Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
  But heaven and fate the first design withstand,
  Nor this great death must grace Ulysses' hand.
  Minerva drives him on the Lycian train;
  Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew'd the plain,
  Alcander, Prytanis, Noemon fell:(154)
  And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,
  But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,
  Rush'd terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
  With joy Sarpedon view'd the wish'd relief,
  And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief:

  "O suffer not the foe to bear away
  My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey;
  If I, unbless'd, must see my son no more,
  My much-loved consort, and my native shore,
  Yet let me die in Ilion's sacred wall;
  Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall."

  He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,
  But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies;
  Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes;
  And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.

  Beneath a beech, Jove's consecrated shade,
  His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:
  Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh,
  Who wrench'd the javelin from his sinewy thigh.
  The fainting soul stood ready wing'd for flight,
  And o'er his eye-balls swam the shades of night;
  But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath,
  Recall'd his spirit from the gates of death.

  The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace,
  Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face;
  None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight,
  Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.
  Who first, who last, by Mars' and Hector's hand,
  Stretch'd in their blood, lay gasping on the sand?
  Tenthras the great, Orestes the renown'd
  For managed steeds, and Trechus press'd the ground;,
  Next OEnomaus and OEnops' offspring died;
  Oresbius last fell groaning at their side:
  Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay,
  In fat Boeotia held his wealthy sway,
  Where lakes surround low Hyle's watery plain;
  A prince and people studious of their gain.

  The carnage Juno from the skies survey'd,
  And touch'd with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid:
  "Oh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy prevail,
  And shall our promise to our people fail?
  How vain the word to Menelaus given
  By Jove's great daughter and the queen of heaven,
  Beneath his arms that Priam's towers should fall,
  If warring gods for ever guard the wall!
  Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes:
  Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!"

  She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war:
  And now heaven's empress calls her blazing car.
  At her command rush forth the steeds divine;
  Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
  Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young,
  The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
  On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel
  Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel.
  Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame;
  The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame,
  Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold
  Two brazen rings of work divine were roll'd.
  The bossy naves of sold silver shone;
  Braces of gold suspend the moving throne:
  The car, behind, an arching figure bore;
  The bending concave form'd an arch before.
  Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold,
  And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
  Herself, impatient, to the ready car,
  The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.

  Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied,
  With flowers adorn'd, with art diversified,
  (The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,)
  Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove.
  Now heaven's dread arms her mighty limbs invest,
  Jove's cuirass blazes on her ample breast;
  Deck'd in sad triumph for the mournful field,
  O'er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield,
  Dire, black, tremendous! Round the margin roll'd,
  A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:
  Here all the terrors of grim War appear,
  Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear,
  Here storm'd Contention, and here Fury frown'd,
  And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crown'd.
  The massy golden helm she next assumes,
  That dreadful nods with four o'ershading plumes;
  So vast, the broad circumference contains
  A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
  The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;
  Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends,
  Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns,
  Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

  Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly,
  While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
  Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,(155)
  Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;(156)
  Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
  The sun's bright portals and the skies command,
  Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,
  Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
  The sounding hinges ring on either side
  The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
  The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies,
  Confused, Olympus' hundred heads arise;
  Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne,
  O'er all the gods superior and alone.
  There with her snowy hand the queen restrains
  The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:

  "O sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
  Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
  What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,
  What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
  Venus, and Phoebus with the dreadful bow,
  Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
  Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind
  No god can govern, and no justice bind.
  Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,
  And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?"

  To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:
  "Go! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
  To tame the monster-god Minerva knows,
  And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes."

  He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey,
  Lash'd her white steeds along the aerial way
  Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls,
  Between the expanded earth and starry poles
  Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,(157)
  O'er the wide main extends his boundless eye,
  Through such a space of air, with thundering sound,
  At every leap the immortal coursers bound
  Troy now they reach'd and touch'd those banks divine,
  Where silver Simois and Scamander join
  There Juno stopp'd, and (her fair steeds unloosed)
  Of air condensed a vapour circumfused
  For these, impregnate with celestial dew,
  On Simois, brink ambrosial herbage grew.
  Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng,
  Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.

  The best and bravest of the Grecian band
  (A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.
  Such was their look as lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood
  Heaven's empress mingles with the mortal crowd,
  And shouts, in Stentor's sounding voice, aloud;
  Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,(158)
  Whose throats surpass'd the force of fifty tongues.

  "Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame,
  And only men in figure and in name!
  Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,
  While fierce in war divine Achilles raged;
  Now issuing fearless they possess the plain,
  Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain."

  Her speech new fury to their hearts convey'd;
  While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;
  The king beside his panting steeds she found,
  O'erspent with toil reposing on the ground;
  To cool his glowing wound he sat apart,
  (The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)
  Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,
  Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend,
  Whose ample belt, that o'er his shoulder lay,
  He eased; and wash'd the clotted gore away.
  The goddess leaning o'er the bending yoke,
  Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke:

  "Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus' kind,
  Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
  Foremost he press'd in glorious toils to share,
  And scarce refrain'd when I forbade the war.
  Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
  And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
  There braved, and vanquish'd, many a hardy knight;
  Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
  Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
  Thy hands I arm'd, and sent thee forth to war:
  But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;
  No drop of all thy father warms thy veins."

  The chief thus answered mild: "Immortal maid!
  I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
  Not fear, thou know'st, withholds me from the plains,
  Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:
  From warring gods thou bad'st me turn my spear,
  And Venus only found resistance here.
  Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands,
  Loth I gave way, and warn'd our Argive bands:
  For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,
  With slaughter red, and raging round the field."

  Then thus Minerva:--"Brave Tydides, hear!
  Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
  Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:
  Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
  Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,
  And every side of wavering combat tries;
  Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made:
  Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid."(159)

  She said, and to the steeds approaching near,
  Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
  The vigorous power the trembling car ascends,
  Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:
  The groaning axle bent beneath the load;
  So great a hero, and so great a god.
  She snatch'd the reins, she lash'd with all her force,
  And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse:
  But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread
  Black Orcus' helmet o'er her radiant head.

            [Illustration: DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.]

                    DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.


  Just then gigantic Periphas lay slain,
  The strongest warrior of the Ãtolian train;
  The god, who slew him, leaves his prostrate prize
  Stretch'd where he fell, and at Tydides flies.
  Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear
  The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war!
  Full at the chief, above his courser's head,
  From Mars's arm the enormous weapon fled:
  Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance
  Far from the car the strong immortal lance.
  Then threw the force of Tydeus' warlike son;
  The javelin hiss'd; the goddess urged it on:
  Where the broad cincture girt his armour round,
  It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.
  From the rent skin the warrior tugs again
  The smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain:
  Loud as the roar encountering armies yield,
  When shouting millions shake the thundering field.
  Both armies start, and trembling gaze around;
  And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound.
  As vapours blown by Auster's sultry breath,
  Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death,
  Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise,
  Choke the parch'd earth, and blacken all the skies;
  In such a cloud the god from combat driven,
  High o'er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.
  Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes,
  There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods,
  Show'd the celestial blood, and with a groan
  Thus pour'd his plaints before the immortal throne:

  "Can Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey,
  And brook the furies of this daring day?
  For mortal men celestial powers engage,
  And gods on gods exert eternal rage:
  From thee, O father! all these ills we bear,
  And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear;
  Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light,
  Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right.
  All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway,
  Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey:
  'Tis hers to offend, and even offending share
  Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguish'd care:
  So boundless she, and thou so partial grown,
  Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.
  Now frantic Diomed, at her command,
  Against the immortals lifts his raging hand:
  The heavenly Venus first his fury found,
  Me next encountering, me he dared to wound;
  Vanquish'd I fled; even I, the god of fight,
  From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.
  Else hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain,
  Heap'd round, and heaving under loads of slain!
  Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie,
  Condemn'd to pain, though fated not to die."

  Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look
  The lord of thunders view'd, and stern bespoke:
  "To me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?
  Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain?
  Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies,
  Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!
  Inhuman discord is thy dire delight,
  The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
  No bounds, no law, thy fiery temper quells,
  And all thy mother in thy soul rebels.
  In vain our threats, in vain our power we use;
  She gives the example, and her son pursues.
  Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn,
  Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born.
  Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,
  Where chain'd on burning rocks the Titans groan."

  Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod;
  Then gave to Paeon's care the bleeding god.(160)
  With gentle hand the balm he pour'd around,
  And heal'd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
  As when the fig's press'd juice, infused in cream,
  To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
  Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
  Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join'd.
  Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress'd
  His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
  Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
  Fast by the throne of heaven's superior lord.
  Juno and Pallas mount the bless'd abodes,
  Their task perform'd, and mix among the gods.

                          [Illustration: JUNO.]

                                  JUNO.





BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.

THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.

The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the chief
augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to appoint
a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the temple of
Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The battle
relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have an
interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of the
friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they make
exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus,
prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a tender leave of
his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.

The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois and
Scamander, and then changes to Troy.

  Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield
  To human force and human skill the field:
  Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;
  Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows;
  While Troy's famed streams, that bound the deathful plain
  On either side, run purple to the main.

  Great Ajax first to conquest led the way,
  Broke the thick ranks, and turn'd the doubtful day.
  The Thracian Acamas his falchion found,
  And hew'd the enormous giant to the ground;
  His thundering arm a deadly stroke impress'd
  Where the black horse-hair nodded o'er his crest;
  Fix'd in his front the brazen weapon lies,
  And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes.
  Next Teuthras' son distain'd the sands with blood,
  Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good:
  In fair Arisbe's walls (his native place)(161)
  He held his seat! a friend to human race.
  Fast by the road, his ever-open door
  Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
  To stern Tydides now he falls a prey,
  No friend to guard him in the dreadful day!
  Breathless the good man fell, and by his side
  His faithful servant, old Calesius died.

  By great Euryalus was Dresus slain,
  And next he laid Opheltius on the plain.
  Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young,
  From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung:
  (Laomedon's white flocks Bucolion fed,
  That monarch's first-born by a foreign bed;
  In secret woods he won the naiad's grace,
  And two fair infants crown'd his strong embrace:)
  Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms;
  The ruthless victor stripp'd their shining arms.

  Astyalus by Polypoetes fell;
  Ulysses' spear Pidytes sent to hell;
  By Teucer's shaft brave Aretaon bled,
  And Nestor's son laid stern Ablerus dead;
  Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave,
  The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave,
  Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,(162)
  And till'd the banks where silver Satnio flow'd.
  Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain;
  And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain.

  Unbless'd Adrastus next at mercy lies
  Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize.
  Scared with the din and tumult of the fight,
  His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight,
  Rush'd on a tamarisk's strong trunk, and broke
  The shatter'd chariot from the crooked yoke;
  Wide o'er the field, resistless as the wind,
  For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.
  Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel:
  Atrides o'er him shakes his vengeful steel;
  The fallen chief in suppliant posture press'd
  The victor's knees, and thus his prayer address'd:

  "O spare my youth, and for the life I owe
  Large gifts of price my father shall bestow.
  When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain,
  Thy hollow ships his captive son detain:
  Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,(163)
  And steel well-temper'd, and persuasive gold."

  He said: compassion touch'd the hero's heart
  He stood, suspended with the lifted dart:
  As pity pleaded for his vanquish'd prize,
  Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,
  And, furious, thus: "Oh impotent of mind!(164)
  Shall these, shall these Atrides' mercy find?
  Well hast thou known proud Troy's perfidious land,
  And well her natives merit at thy hand!
  Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age,
  Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:
  Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
  Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;(165)
  A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,
  To warn the nations, and to curb the great!"

  The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address'd,
  To rigid justice steel'd his brother's breast
  Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust;
  The monarch's javelin stretch'd him in the dust,
  Then pressing with his foot his panting heart,
  Forth from the slain he tugg'd the reeking dart.
  Old Nestor saw, and roused the warrior's rage;
  "Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage;
  No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,
  To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
  Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
  First gain the conquest, then reward the toil."

  And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,
  And frighted Troy within her walls, retired,
  Had not sage Helenus her state redress'd,
  Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
  Where Hector stood, with great Ãneas join'd,
  The seer reveal'd the counsels of his mind:

  "Ye generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay
  The cares and glories of this doubtful day;
  On whom your aids, your country's hopes depend;
  Wise to consult, and active to defend!
  Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite,
  Turn back the routed, and forbid the flight,
  Ere yet their wives' soft arms the cowards gain,
  The sport and insult of the hostile train.
  When your commands have hearten'd every band,
  Ourselves, here fix'd, will make the dangerous stand;
  Press'd as we are, and sore of former fight,
  These straits demand our last remains of might.
  Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire,
  And teach our mother what the gods require:
  Direct the queen to lead the assembled train
  Of Troy's chief matrons to Minerva's fane;(166)
  Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power,
  With offer'd vows, in Ilion's topmost tower.
  The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altars led:
  If so the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare,
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire;
  Not thus Achilles taught our hosts to dread,
  Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed;
  Not thus resistless ruled the stream of fight,
  In rage unbounded, and unmatch'd in might."

  Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,
  Leap'd from his trembling chariot to the ground;
  Through all his host inspiring force he flies,
  And bids the thunder of the battle rise.
  With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,
  And turn the tide of conflict on the foe:
  Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears;
  All Greece recedes, and 'midst her triumphs fears;
  Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars,
  Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.

  Then thus aloud: "Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!
  And you whom distant nations send to war!
  Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
  Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
  One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
  To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
  Nor shall, I trust, the matrons' holy train,
  And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain."

  This said, with ample strides the hero pass'd;
  The shield's large orb behind his shoulder cast,
  His neck o'ershading, to his ankle hung;
  And as he march'd the brazen buckler rung.

  Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),(167)
  Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus' son
  Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
  Observed each other, and had mark'd for war.
  Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Our eyes till now that aspect ne'er beheld,
  Where fame is reap'd amid the embattled field;
  Yet far before the troops thou dar'st appear,
  And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
  Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
  Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
  But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,
  Know with immortals we no more contend.
  Not long Lycurgus view'd the golden light,
  That daring man who mix'd with gods in fight.
  Bacchus, and Bacchus' votaries, he drove,
  With brandish'd steel, from Nyssa's sacred grove:
  Their consecrated spears lay scatter'd round,
  With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;
  While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood,
  And Thetis' arms received the trembling god.
  Nor fail'd the crime the immortals' wrath to move;
  (The immortals bless'd with endless ease above;)
  Deprived of sight by their avenging doom,
  Cheerless he breathed, and wander'd in the gloom,
  Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes,
  A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods!
  I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth
  Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth,
  Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,
  Approach, and enter the dark gates of death."

  "What, or from whence I am, or who my sire,
  (Replied the chief,) can Tydeus' son inquire?
  Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
  Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
  Another race the following spring supplies;
  They fall successive, and successive rise:
  So generations in their course decay;
  So flourish these, when those are pass'd away.
  But if thou still persist to search my birth,
  Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth.

  "A city stands on Argos' utmost bound,
  (Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renown'd,)
  Aeolian Sisyphus, with wisdom bless'd,
  In ancient time the happy wall possess'd,
  Then call'd Ephyre: Glaucus was his son;
  Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon,
  Who o'er the sons of men in beauty shined,
  Loved for that valour which preserves mankind.
  Then mighty Praetus Argos' sceptre sway'd,
  Whose hard commands Bellerophon obey'd.
  With direful jealousy the monarch raged,
  And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
  For him Antaea burn'd with lawless flame,
  And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
  In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
  Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
  Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled,
  And begg'd revenge for her insulted bed:
  Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate;
  But hospitable laws restrain'd his hate:
  To Lycia the devoted youth he sent,
  With tablets seal'd, that told his dire intent.(168)
  Now bless'd by every power who guards the good,
  The chief arrived at Xanthus' silver flood:
  There Lycia's monarch paid him honours due,
  Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
  But when the tenth bright morning orient glow'd,
  The faithful youth his monarch's mandate show'd:
  The fatal tablets, till that instant seal'd,
  The deathful secret to the king reveal'd.
  First, dire Chimaera's conquest was enjoin'd;
  A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
  Behind, a dragon's fiery tail was spread;
  A goat's rough body bore a lion's head;
  Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
  Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

  "This pest he slaughter'd, (for he read the skies,
  And trusted heaven's informing prodigies,)
  Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,(169)
  (Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
  Next the bold Amazons' whole force defied;
  And conquer'd still, for heaven was on his side.

  "Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
  At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
  With levell'd spears along the winding shore:
  There fell they breathless, and return'd no more.

  "At length the monarch, with repentant grief,
  Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
  His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
  With half the honours of his ample reign:
  The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
  With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crown'd.
  There long the chief his happy lot possess'd,
  With two brave sons and one fair daughter bless'd;
  (Fair e'en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love
  Crown'd with Sarpedon's birth the embrace of Jove;)
  But when at last, distracted in his mind,
  Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,
  Wide o'er the Aleian field he chose to stray,
  A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way!(170)
  Woes heap'd on woes consumed his wasted heart:
  His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebe's dart;
  His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,
  In combat on the Solymaean plain.
  Hippolochus survived: from him I came,
  The honour'd author of my birth and name;
  By his decree I sought the Trojan town;
  By his instructions learn to win renown,
  To stand the first in worth as in command,
  To add new honours to my native land,
  Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,
  And emulate the glories of our race."

  He spoke, and transport fill'd Tydides' heart;
  In earth the generous warrior fix'd his dart,
  Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince address'd:
  "Welcome, my brave hereditary guest!
  Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,
  Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
  Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old;
  OEneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:
  Our ancient seat his honour'd presence graced,
  Where twenty days in genial rites he pass'd.
  The parting heroes mutual presents left;
  A golden goblet was thy grandsire's gift;
  OEneus a belt of matchless work bestowed,
  That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glow'd.
  (This from his pledge I learn'd, which, safely stored
  Among my treasures, still adorns my board:
  For Tydeus left me young, when Thebe's wall
  Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.)
  Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;
  If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline,
  My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.
  Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield,
  In the full harvest of yon ample field;
  Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
  But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
  Now change we arms, and prove to either host
  We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

  Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
  Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
  Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
  (Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
  For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
  For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
  He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,(171)
  A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

  Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Great Hector, enter'd at the Scaean gate.(172)
  Beneath the beech-tree's consecrated shades,
  The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
  Around him flock'd, all press'd with pious care
  For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
  He bids the train in long procession go,
  And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
  And now to Priam's stately courts he came,
  Rais'd on arch'd columns of stupendous frame;
  O'er these a range of marble structure runs,
  The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
  In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,(173)
  Opposed to those, where Priam's daughters sate.
  Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
  Of equal beauty, and of polish'd stone.
  Hither great Hector pass'd, nor pass'd unseen
  Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
  (With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
  Surpass'd the nymphs of Troy's illustrious race.)
  Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
  And press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "O Hector! say, what great occasion calls
  My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
  Com'st thou to supplicate the almighty power
  With lifted hands, from Ilion's lofty tower?
  Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown'd,
  In Jove's high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
  And pay due vows to all the gods around.
  Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul,
  And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;
  Spent as thou art with long laborious fight,
  The brave defender of thy country's right."

  "Far hence be Bacchus' gifts; (the chief rejoin'd;)
  Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,
  Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
  Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice
  To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
  By me that holy office were profaned;
  Ill fits it me, with human gore distain'd,
  To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise,
  Or offer heaven's great Sire polluted praise.
  You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train,
  And burn rich odours in Minerva's fane.
  The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
  So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
  Be this, O mother, your religious care:
  I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
  If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
  The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
  Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
  That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!(174)
  Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
  Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end."

  This heard, she gave command: and summon'd came
  Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
  The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
  Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
  There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
  Sidonian maids embroider'd every part,
  Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
  With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
  Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
  The various textures and the various dyes,
  She chose a veil that shone superior far,
  And glow'd refulgent as the morning star.
  Herself with this the long procession leads;
  The train majestically slow proceeds.
  Soon as to Ilion's topmost tower they come,
  And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
  Antenor's consort, fair Theano, waits
  As Pallas' priestess, and unbars the gates.
  With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
  They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
  The priestess then the shining veil displays,
  Placed on Minerva's knees, and thus she prays:

  "Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
  Troy's strong defence, unconquer'd Pallas, aid!
  Break thou Tydides' spear, and let him fall
  Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
  So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
  Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
  But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,
  Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!"
  So pray'd the priestess in her holy fane;
  So vow'd the matrons, but they vow'd in vain.

  While these appear before the power with prayers,
  Hector to Paris' lofty dome repairs.(175)
  Himself the mansion raised, from every part
  Assembling architects of matchless art.
  Near Priam's court and Hector's palace stands
  The pompous structure, and the town commands.
  A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length,
  The steely point with golden ringlets join'd,
  Before him brandish'd, at each motion shined
  Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found
  His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round,
  His eyes delighting with their splendid show,
  Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
  Beside him Helen with her virgins stands,
  Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.

  Him thus inactive, with an ardent look
  The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
  "Thy hate to Troy, is this the time to show?
  (O wretch ill-fated, and thy country's foe!)
  Paris and Greece against us both conspire,
  Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
  For thee great Ilion's guardian heroes fall,
  Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall,
  For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,
  And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
  Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,
  Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
  Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,
  And all the Phrygian glories at an end."

  "Brother, 'tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,)
  Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:
  Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
  On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:
  Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate,
  And mourn'd, in secret, his and Ilion's fate.
  'Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,
  And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
  Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,
  'Tis man's to fight, but heaven's to give success.
  But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;
  Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind."

                  [Illustration: HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.]

                          HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.


  He said, nor answer'd Priam's warlike son;
  When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:

  "Oh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame
  That caused these woes deserve a sister's name!)
  Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,
  The day that show'd me to the golden sun
  Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear
  The fatal infant to the fowls of air?
  Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,
  And midst the roarings of the waters died?
  Heaven fill'd up all my ills, and I accursed
  Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
  Helen at least a braver spouse might claim,
  Warm'd with some virtue, some regard of fame!
  Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline,
  With toils, sustain'd for Paris' sake and mine
  The gods have link'd our miserable doom,
  Our present woe, and infamy to come:
  Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long,
  Example sad! and theme of future song."

  The chief replied: "This time forbids to rest;
  The Trojan bands, by hostile fury press'd,
  Demand their Hector, and his arm require;
  The combat urges, and my soul's on fire.
  Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
  And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
  Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
  My wife, my infant, claim a moment's stay;
  This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
  Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
  This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
  May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand."

  He said, and pass'd with sad presaging heart
  To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part;
  At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
  She, with one maid of all her menial train,
  Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
  Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
  Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
  There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
  Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

  But he who found not whom his soul desired,
  Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
  Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
  Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
  "Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
  Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
  To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
  To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
  Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
  She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
  Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
  Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
  The nurse attended with her infant boy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

  Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
  Swift through the town he trod his former way,
  Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
  And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
  With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
  His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
  (Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
  His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
  Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
  Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
  To this loved infant Hector gave the name
  Scamandrius, from Scamander's honour'd stream;
  Astyanax the Trojans call'd the boy,
  From his great father, the defence of Troy.
  Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resign'd
  To tender passions all his mighty mind;
  His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
  Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
  Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh,
  And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.

          [Illustration: THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.]

                  THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.


  "Too daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run?
  Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
  And think'st thou not how wretched we shall be,
  A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
  For sure such courage length of life denies,
  And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
  Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
  Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
  O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
  All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
  So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
  And end with sorrows as they first begun.
  No parent now remains my griefs to share,
  No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
  The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
  Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
  His fate compassion in the victor bred;
  Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
  His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
  And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
  Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn'd,
  The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn'd,
  Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
  A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

  "By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
  In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
  While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
  Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
  My mother lived to wear the victor's bands,
  The queen of Hippoplacia's sylvan lands:
  Redeem'd too late, she scarce beheld again
  Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
  When ah! oppress'd by life-consuming woe,
  She fell a victim to Diana's bow.

  "Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
  My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
  Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
  Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
  Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
  Oh, prove a husband's and a father's care!
  That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
  Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
  Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
  There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
  That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
  And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
  Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
  Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
  Let others in the field their arms employ,
  But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."

  The chief replied: "That post shall be my care,
  Not that alone, but all the works of war.
  How would the sons of Troy, in arms renown'd,
  And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground
  Attaint the lustre of my former name,
  Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
  My early youth was bred to martial pains,
  My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
  Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
  And guard my father's glories, and my own.

  "Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
  (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
  The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
  And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
  And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
  My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
  Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
  Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
  As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:
  I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
  In Argive looms our battles to design,
  And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
  To bear the victor's hard commands, or bring
  The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
  There while you groan beneath the load of life,
  They cry, 'Behold the mighty Hector's wife!'
  Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
  Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
  The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
  A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
  May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
  Press'd with a load of monumental clay!
  Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
  Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."

  Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
  Stretch'd his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
  The babe clung crying to his nurse's breast,
  Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
  With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
  And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
  The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
  And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;
  Then kiss'd the child, and, lifting high in air,
  Thus to the gods preferr'd a father's prayer:

  "O thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne,
  And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
  Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
  To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
  Against his country's foes the war to wage,
  And rise the Hector of the future age!
  So when triumphant from successful toils
  Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
  Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
  And say, 'This chief transcends his father's fame:'
  While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
  His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

  He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
  Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
  Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
  Hush'd to repose, and with a smile survey'd.
  The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
  She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
  The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
  And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

  "Andromache! my soul's far better part,
  Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
  No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
  Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
  Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
  And such the hard condition of our birth:
  No force can then resist, no flight can save,
  All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
  No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
  Me glory summons to the martial scene,
  The field of combat is the sphere for men.
  Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
  The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
  His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
  His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
  Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
  That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
  Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
  There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
  Through all her train the soft infection ran;
  The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
  And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

  But now, no longer deaf to honour's call,
  Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
  In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
  Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
  The wanton courser thus with reins unbound(176)
  Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
  Pamper'd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
  And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
  His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies;
  He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
  With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
  In arms refulgent as the god of day,
  The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
  Rush'd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

  And now, the warriors passing on the way,
  The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
  To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
  "O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
  Thy power in war with justice none contest;
  Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess'd.
  What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,
  Or godlike Paris live a woman's slave!
  My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,
  And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away.
  Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,
  For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
  These ills shall cease, whene'er by Jove's decree
  We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty:
  While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns,
  And Greece indignant through her seas returns."

                    [Illustration: BOWS AND BOW CASE.]

                            BOWS AND BOW CASE.


                          [Illustration: IRIS.]

                                  IRIS.





BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT

THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.

The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector, Minerva
is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her descend from
Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put off the general
engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a
single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is
cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after several attacks, are parted
by the night. The Trojans calling a council, Antenor purposes the delivery
of Helen to the Greeks, to which Paris will not consent, but offers to
restore them her riches. Priam sends a herald to make this offer, and to
demand a truce for burning the dead, the last of which only is agreed to
by Agamemnon. When the funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the
advice of Nestor, erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp,
flanked with towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune
testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from
Jupiter. Both armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens
the Trojans with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.

The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the
next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites of
the slain and one more in building the fortification before the ships. So
that somewhat about three days is employed in this book. The scene lies
wholly in the field.

  So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Then rush'd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
  Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms;
  Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
  As when to sailors labouring through the main,
  That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
  Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
  The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
  So welcome these to Troy's desiring train,
  The bands are cheer'd, the war awakes again.

  Bold Paris first the work of death begun
  On great Menestheus, Areithous' son,
  Sprung from the fair Philomeda's embrace,
  The pleasing Arne was his native place.
  Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
  Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow(177)
  Full on his neck, from Hector's weighty hand;
  And roll'd, with limbs relax'd, along the land.
  By Glaucus' spear the bold Iphmous bleeds,
  Fix'd in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
  Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound,
  Drop the cold useless members on the ground.

  When now Minerva saw her Argives slain,
  From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain
  Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight,
  Nor shot less swift from Ilion's towery height.
  Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;
  When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid:

  "What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
  Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
  Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
  To give to Greece the long divided day?
  Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,
  Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate;
  This day, the business of the field suspend;
  War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;
  Since vengeful goddesses confederate join
  To raze her walls, though built by hands divine."

  To whom the progeny of Jove replies:
  "I left, for this, the council of the skies:
  But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,
  What art shall calm the furious sons of war?"
  To her the god: "Great Hector's soul incite
  To dare the boldest Greek to single fight,
  Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show
  A warrior worthy to be Hector's foe."

  At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;
  Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew;
  Hector, inspired, he sought: to him address'd,
  Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast:
  "O son of Priam! let thy faithful ear
  Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear!
  Go forth persuasive, and a while engage
  The warring nations to suspend their rage;
  Then dare the boldest of the hostile train
  To mortal combat on the listed plain.
  For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
  The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate."

  He said: the warrior heard the word with joy;
  Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
  Held by the midst athwart. On either hand
  The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand;
  Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:
  They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
  The Athenian maid, and glorious god of day,(178)
  With silent joy the settling hosts survey:
  In form of vultures, on the beech's height
  They sit conceal'd, and wait the future fight.

  The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields,
  Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
  As when a general darkness veils the main,
  (Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat'ry plain,)
  The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,
  And a still horror saddens all the deeps;
  Thus in thick orders settling wide around,
  At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
  Great Hector first amidst both armies broke
  The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke:

  "Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
  What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
  Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
  O'erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
  War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
  Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
  You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
  'Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
  From all your troops select the boldest knight,
  And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
  Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
  Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
  But let my body, to my friends return'd,
  By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burn'd.
  And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
  Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust;
  If mine the glory to despoil the foe;
  On Phoebus' temple I'll his arms bestow:
  The breathless carcase to your navy sent,
  Greece on the shore shall raise a monument;
  Which when some future mariner surveys,
  Wash'd by broad Hellespont's resounding seas,
  Thus shall he say, 'A valiant Greek lies there,
  By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,'
  The stone shall tell your vanquish'd hero's name.
  And distant ages learn the victor's fame."

  This fierce defiance Greece astonish'd heard,
  Blush'd to refuse, and to accept it fear'd.
  Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
  And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

  "Women of Greece! O scandal of your race,
  Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
  How great the shame, when every age shall know
  That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
  Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
  A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
  Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
  Myself will dare the danger of the day;
  'Tis man's bold task the generous strife to try,
  But in the hands of God is victory."

  These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  His manly limbs in azure arms he dress'd.
  That day, Atrides! a superior hand
  Had stretch'd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
  But all at once, thy fury to compose,
  The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
  Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press'd
  Thy daring hand, and this advice address'd:
  "Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
  And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
  Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
  Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine:
  Even fierce Achilles learn'd its force to fear,
  And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
  Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
  Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
  The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
  Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
  Content the doubtful honour might forego,
  So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

  He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
  He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
  No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
  His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

  He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
  Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
  Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
  How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
  Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
  What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll'd,
  O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
  Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
  Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
  Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
  Each name, each action, and each hero's sire!
  Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
  And trembling all before one hostile hand;
  How would he lift his aged arms on high,
  Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
  Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove!
  Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
  And give this arm the spring which once it knew
  When fierce in war, where Jardan's waters fall,
  I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
  And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
  Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.(179)
  There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
  Proud Areithous' dreadful arms to wield;
  Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
  By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
  No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
  But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
  Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
  Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
  Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
  Nor aught the warrior's thundering mace avail'd.
  Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
  Had given the vanquish'd, now the victor bore:
  But when old age had dimm'd Lycurgus' eyes,
  To Ereuthalion he consign'd the prize.
  Furious with this he crush'd our levell'd bands,
  And dared the trial of the strongest hands;
  Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay:
  All saw, and fear'd, his huge tempestuous sway
  Till I, the youngest of the host, appear'd,
  And, youngest, met whom all our army fear'd.
  I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crown'd:
  Prone fell the giant o'er a length of ground.
  What then I was, O were your Nestor now!
  Not Hector's self should want an equal foe.
  But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,
  The flower of Greece, the examples of our host,
  Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway,
  Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?"

  His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame;
  And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,
  Up-started fierce: but far before the rest
  The king of men advanced his dauntless breast:
  Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appear'd;
  And next his bulk gigantic Ajax rear'd;
  Oileus follow'd; Idomen was there,(180)
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war:
  With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,
  And wise Ulysses closed the daring band.
  All these, alike inspired with noble rage,
  Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage:

  "Lest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,
  What chief shall combat, let the gods decide.
  Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise
  His country's fame, his own immortal praise."

  The lots produced, each hero signs his own:
  Then in the general's helm the fates are thrown,(181)
  The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands,
  And vows like these ascend from all the bands:
  "Grant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,
  A worthy champion for the Grecian state:
  This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,
  Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove."
  Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,
  Leap'd forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
  This from the right to left the herald bears,
  Held out in order to the Grecian peers;
  Each to his rival yields the mark unknown,
  Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;
  Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes,
  Then casts before him, and with transport cries:

  "Warriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy;
  Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
  Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest,
  To Saturn's son be all your vows address'd:
  But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,
  And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
  Said I in secret? No, your vows declare
  In such a voice as fills the earth and air,
  Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?
  Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
  From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,
  And, born to combats, fear no force on earth."

  He said. The troops with elevated eyes,
  Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies:
  "O father of mankind, superior lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored:
  Who in the highest heaven hast fix'd thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:
  Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away
  The praise and conquest of this doubtful day;
  Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care,
  That both may claim it, and that both may share."

  Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on;
  Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:
  He moves to combat with majestic pace;
  So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,(182)
  When Jove to punish faithless men prepares,
  And gives whole nations to the waste of wars,
  Thus march'd the chief, tremendous as a god;
  Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:(183)
  His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
  He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band.
  Through every Argive heart new transport ran;
  All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
  Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppress'd,
  Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:
  'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
  Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

  Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
  As from a brazen tower, o'erlook'd the field.
  Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
  Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
  (The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
  And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
  This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
  And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

  "Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
  What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
  Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
  Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
  Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
  Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
  Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
  Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
  No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

  "O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
  (To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
  Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
  New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
  Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
  To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
  I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
  Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
  To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
  And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
  But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
  I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

  He said, and rising, high above the field
  Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
  Full on the brass descending from above
  Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
  Till in the seventh it fix'd. Then Ajax threw;
  Through Hector's shield the forceful javelin flew,
  His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
  Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
  From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew,
  Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;
  Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
  At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends;
  The blunted point against the buckler bends;
  But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near,
  Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear;
  It reach'd his neck, with matchless strength impell'd!
  Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield.
  Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down,
  In his strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone,
  Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he bends;
  Full on the brazen boss the stone descends;
  The hollow brass resounded with the shock:
  Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock,
  Applied each nerve, and swinging round on high,
  With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly;
  The huge stone thundering through his buckler broke:
  His slacken'd knees received the numbing stroke;
  Great Hector falls extended on the field,
  His bulk supporting on the shatter'd shield:
  Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apollo's might
  Confirm'd his sinews, and restored to fight.
  And now both heroes their broad falchions drew
  In flaming circles round their heads they flew;
  But then by heralds' voice the word was given.
  The sacred ministers of earth and heaven:
  Divine Talthybius, whom the Greeks employ.
  And sage Idaeus on the part of Troy,
  Between the swords their peaceful sceptres rear'd;
  And first Idaeus' awful voice was heard:

        [Illustration: HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.]

                HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.


  "Forbear, my sons! your further force to prove,
  Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove.
  To either host your matchless worth is known,
  Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.
  But now the Night extends her awful shade;
  The goddess parts you; be the night obey'd."(184)

  To whom great Ajax his high soul express'd:
  "O sage! to Hector be these words address'd.
  Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight,
  Let him demand the sanction of the night;
  If first he ask'd it, I content obey,
  And cease the strife when Hector shows the way."

  "O first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoin'd)
  Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind,
  With strength of body, and with worth of mind!
  Now martial law commands us to forbear;
  Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war,
  Some future day shall lengthen out the strife,
  And let the gods decide of death or life!
  Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade,
  And heaven enjoins it, be the night obey'd.
  Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian friends,
  And joy the nations whom thy arm defends;
  As I shall glad each chief, and Trojan wife,
  Who wearies heaven with vows for Hector's life.
  But let us, on this memorable day,
  Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say,
  'Not hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend;
  And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.'"

  With that, a sword with stars of silver graced,
  The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased,
  He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestow'd
  A radiant belt that rich with purple glow'd.
  Then with majestic grace they quit the plain;
  This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.

  The Trojan bands returning Hector wait,
  And hail with joy the Champion of their state;
  Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round,
  Alive, unarm'd, and vigorous from his wound;
  To Troy's high gates the godlike man they bear
  Their present triumph, as their late despair.

  But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed,
  The well-arm'd Greeks to Agamemnon lead.
  A steer for sacrifice the king design'd,
  Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.
  The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide,
  The beast they quarter, and the joints divide;
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  The king himself (an honorary sign)
  Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.(185)
  When now the rage of hunger was removed,
  Nestor, in each persuasive art approved,
  The sage whose counsels long had sway'd the rest,
  In words like these his prudent thought express'd:

  "How dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost,
  What Greeks are perish'd! what a people lost!
  What tides of blood have drench'd Scamander's shore!
  What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!
  Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrow's light
  Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight:
  Some space at least permit the war to breathe,
  While we to flames our slaughter'd friends bequeath,
  From the red field their scatter'd bodies bear,
  And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear;
  So decent urns their snowy bones may keep,
  And pious children o'er their ashes weep.
  Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed,
  High o'er them all a general tomb be raised;
  Next, to secure our camp and naval powers,
  Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;
  From space to space be ample gates around,
  For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
  So Greece to combat shall in safety go,
  Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe."
  'Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;
  The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.

  Meanwhile, convened at Priam's palace-gate,
  The Trojan peers in nightly council sate;
  A senate void of order, as of choice:
  Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
  Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
  'Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires,
  And I but move what every god requires:
  Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
  And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
  The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke,
  Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
  As this advice ye practise, or reject,
  So hope success, or dread the dire effect."

  The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied
  The graceful husband of the Spartan bride:
  "Cold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years
  But sound ungrateful in a warrior's ears:
  Old man, if void of fallacy or art,
  Thy words express the purpose of thy heart,
  Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;
  But wisdom has its date, assign'd by heaven.
  Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!
  Their treasures I'll restore, but not the dame;
  My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;
  But be this bright possession ever mine."

  'Twas then, the growing discord to compose,
  Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose:
  His godlike aspect deep attention drew:
  He paused, and these pacific words ensue:

  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
  Now take refreshment as the hour demands;
  Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
  Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
  Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent,
  Before their ships proclaim my son's intent.
  Next let a truce be ask'd, that Troy may burn
  Her slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn;
  That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

  The monarch spoke: the warriors snatch'd with haste
  (Each at his post in arms) a short repast.
  Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day,
  To the black ships Idaeus bent his way;
  There, to the sons of Mars, in council found,
  He raised his voice: the host stood listening round.

  "Ye sons of Atreus, and ye Greeks, give ear!
  The words of Troy, and Troy's great monarch, hear.
  Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)
  What Paris, author of the war, declares.
  The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore
  (Oh had he perish'd ere they touch'd our shore!)
  He proffers injured Greece: with large increase
  Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
  But to restore the beauteous bride again,
  This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
  Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn
  Our slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn.
  That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

  The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke;
  At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:
  "Oh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame,
  Their proffer'd wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
  Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,
  And Troy already totters to her fall."

  The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,
  With general shouts return'd him loud acclaim.
  Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace:
  "Herald! in him thou hear'st the voice of Greece
  For what remains; let funeral flames be fed
  With heroes' corps: I war not with the dead:
  Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,
  And gratify the manes of the slain.
  Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!"
  He said, and rear'd his sceptre to the sky.

  To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay
  To wait the event, the herald bent his way.
  He came, and standing in the midst, explain'd
  The peace rejected, but the truce obtain'd.
  Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,
  Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:
  Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore,
  Hew'd the green forests, and the bodies bore.
  And now from forth the chambers of the main,
  To shed his sacred light on earth again,
  Arose the golden chariot of the day,
  And tipp'd the mountains with a purple ray.
  In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train
  Through heaps of carnage search'd the mournful plain.
  Scarce could the friend his slaughter'd friend explore,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deformed with gore.
  The wounds they wash'd, their pious tears they shed,
  And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.
  Sage Priam check'd their grief: with silent haste
  The bodies decent on the piles were placed:
  With melting hearts the cold remains they burn'd,
  And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy return'd.
  Nor less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed,
  And decent on the pile dispose the dead;
  The cold remains consume with equal care;
  And slowly, sadly, to their fleet repair.
  Now, ere the morn had streak'd with reddening light
  The doubtful confines of the day and night,
  About the dying flames the Greeks appear'd,
  And round the pile a general tomb they rear'd.
  Then, to secure the camp and naval powers,
  They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:(186)
  From space to space were ample gates around,
  For passing chariots, and a trench profound
  Of large extent; and deep in earth below,
  Strong piles infix'd stood adverse to the foe.

  So toil'd the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above,
  In shining circle round their father Jove,
  Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man:
  Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began:

  "What mortals henceforth shall our power adore,
  Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore,
  If the proud Grecians thus successful boast
  Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?
  See the long walls extending to the main,
  No god consulted, and no victim slain!
  Their fame shall fill the world's remotest ends,
  Wide as the morn her golden beam extends;
  While old Laomedon's divine abodes,
  Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods,
  Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep."
  Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.

  The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies,
  That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies:
  "Strong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make
  The solid earth's eternal basis shake!
  What cause of fear from mortal works could move(187)
  The meanest subject of our realms above?
  Where'er the sun's refulgent rays are cast,
  Thy power is honour'd, and thy fame shall last.
  But yon proud work no future age shall view,
  No trace remain where once the glory grew.
  The sapp'd foundations by thy force shall fall,
  And, whelm'd beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:
  Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore:
  The ruin vanish'd, and the name no more."

  Thus they in heaven: while, o'er the Grecian train,
  The rolling sun descending to the main
  Beheld the finish'd work. Their bulls they slew;
  Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
  And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos' strands,
  With Bacchus' blessings cheered the generous bands.
  Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent
  A thousant measures to the royal tent.
  (Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore
  To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
  The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
  And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
  Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave;(188)
  Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
  All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
  Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
  But Jove averse the signs of wrath display'd,
  And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
  Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
  While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
  Each pour'd to Jove before the bowl was crown'd;
  And large libations drench'd the thirsty ground:
  Then late, refresh'd with sleep from toils of fight,
  Enjoy'd the balmy blessings of the night.

               [Illustration: GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.]

                       GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.





BOOK VIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.

Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the
pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of him
that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.(189) his balances the
fates of both, and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings.
Nestor alone continues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him;
whose exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described. Juno
endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in
vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by Hector, and carried
off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are restrained by
Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to the battle. Hector
continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to their fortifications
before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the watch all night in the
camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and escaping by flight. They
kindle fires through all the fields, and pass the night under arms.

The time of seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of the poem
to the end of this book. The scene here (except of the celestial machines)
lies in the field towards the seashore.

  Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn,
  Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn;
  When Jove convened the senate of the skies,
  Where high Olympus' cloudy tops arise,
  The sire of gods his awful silence broke;
  The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke:

  "Celestial states! immortal gods! give ear,
  Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear;
  The fix'd decree which not all heaven can move;
  Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve!
  What god but enters yon forbidden field,
  Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,
  Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven,
  Gash'd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven;
  Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown,
  Low in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan,
  With burning chains fix'd to the brazen floors,
  And lock'd by hell's inexorable doors;
  As deep beneath the infernal centre hurl'd,(190)
  As from that centre to the ethereal world.
  Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes:
  And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.
  League all your forces, then, ye powers above,
  Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.
  Let down our golden everlasting chain(191)
  Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main
  Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth,
  To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth
  Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand,
  I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land;
  I fix the chain to great Olympus' height,
  And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight!
  For such I reign, unbounded and above;
  And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove."

  The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply:
  A reverend horror silenced all the sky;
  Trembling they stood before their sovereign's look;
  At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke:

  "O first and greatest! God, by gods adored
  We own thy might, our father and our lord!
  But, ah! permit to pity human state:
  If not to help, at least lament their fate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain;
  Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move,
  Or all must perish in the wrath of Jove."

  The cloud-compelling god her suit approved,
  And smiled superior on his best beloved;
  Then call'd his coursers, and his chariot took;
  The stedfast firmament beneath them shook:
  Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot roll'd;
  Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold:
  Of heaven's undrossy gold the gods array,
  Refulgent, flash'd intolerable day.
  High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly
  Between the extended earth and starry sky.
  But when to Ida's topmost height he came,
  (Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,)
  Where o'er her pointed summits proudly raised,
  His fane breathed odours, and his altar blazed:
  There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire
  Of gods and men released the steeds of fire:
  Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;
  High on the cloudy point his seat he placed;
  Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys,
  The town, and tents, and navigable seas.

  Now had the Grecians snatch'd a short repast,
  And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
  Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day
  The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
  Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain:
  Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound;
  And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
  To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
  Victors and vanquish'd join promiscuous cries,
  Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
  Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
  The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,(192)
  With equal hand: in these explored the fate
  Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
  Press'd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
  Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
  Then Jove from Ida's top his horrors spreads;
  The clouds burst dreadful o'er the Grecian heads;
  Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
  Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
  Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
  The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
  Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
  Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
  Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustain'd
  Nestor alone, amidst the storm remain'd.
  Unwilling he remain'd, for Paris' dart
  Had pierced his courser in a mortal part;
  Fix'd in the forehead, where the springing man
  Curl'd o'er the brow, it stung him to the brain;
  Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear,
  Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
  Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed
  The encumber'd chariot from the dying steed,
  When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,
  Pour'd to the tumult on his whirling car.
  That day had stretch'd beneath his matchless hand
  The hoary monarch of the Pylian band,
  But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd
  He rush'd, and on Ulysses call'd aloud:

  "Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
  Oh, flight unworthy great Laertes' son!
  Mix'd with the vulgar shall thy fate be found,
  Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?
  Oh turn and save from Hector's direful rage
  The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage."
  His fruitless words are lost unheard in air,
  Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
  But bold Tydides to the rescue goes,
  A single warrior midst a host of foes;
  Before the coursers with a sudden spring
  He leap'd, and anxious thus bespoke the king:

  "Great perils, father! wait the unequal fight;
  These younger champions will oppress thy might.
  Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow,
  Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow.
  Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the car
  Observe the steeds of Tros, renown'd in war.
  Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
  To dare the fight, or urge the rapid race:
  These late obey'd Ãneas' guiding rein;
  Leave thou thy chariot to our faithful train;
  With these against yon Trojans will we go,
  Nor shall great Hector want an equal foe;
  Fierce as he is, even he may learn to fear
  The thirsty fury of my flying spear."

  Thus said the chief; and Nestor, skill'd in war,
  Approves his counsel, and ascends the car:
  The steeds he left, their trusty servants hold;
  Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:
  The reverend charioteer directs the course,
  And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.
  Hector they face; unknowing how to fear,
  Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl'd his spear.
  The spear with erring haste mistook its way,
  But plunged in Eniopeus' bosom lay.
  His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;
  The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
  Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill'd,
  Yet unrevenged permits to press the field;
  Till, to supply his place and rule the car,
  Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
  And now had death and horror cover'd all;(193)
  Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall
  Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound
  Roll'd the big thunder o'er the vast profound:
  Full in Tydides' face the lightning flew;
  The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue;
  The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;
  And Nestor's trembling hand confess'd his fright:
  He dropp'd the reins: and, shook with sacred dread,
  Thus, turning, warn'd the intrepid Diomed:

  "O chief! too daring in thy friend's defence
  Retire advised, and urge the chariot hence.
  This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies
  Assists great Hector, and our palm denies.
  Some other sun may see the happier hour,
  When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power.
  'Tis not in man his fix'd decree to move:
  The great will glory to submit to Jove."

  "O reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies)
  Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast
  I fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
  Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
  O'erwhelm me, earth; and hide a warrior's shame!"
  To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:(194)
  "Gods! can thy courage fear the Phrygian's pride?
  Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast?
  Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host,
  Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost;
  Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword
  That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord."
  He said, and, hasty, o'er the gasping throng
  Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along;
  The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind;
  The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.
  Then with a voice that shakes the solid skies,
  Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies.
  "Go, mighty hero! graced above the rest
  In seats of council and the sumptuous feast:
  Now hope no more those honours from thy train;
  Go less than woman, in the form of man!
  To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,
  To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames,
  Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;
  This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead."

  Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
  To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;
  Thrice turn'd the chief, and thrice imperial Jove
  On Ida's summits thunder'd from above.
  Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light,
  (The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:

  "Hear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,
  All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
  Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,
  Your great forefathers' glories, and your own.
  Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame
  Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame.
  In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,
  Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
  High o'er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound,
  And pass victorious o'er the levell'd mound.
  Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand,
  Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;
  Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,
  All Greece, encompass'd, in one blaze expires."

  Furious he said; then bending o'er the yoke,
  Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke:

  "Now, Xanthus, Ãthon, Lampus, urge the chase,
  And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;
  Be fleet, be fearless, this important day,
  And all your master's well-spent care repay.
  For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand,
  Served with pure wheat, and by a princess' hand;
  For this my spouse, of great Aetion's line,
  So oft has steep'd the strengthening grain in wine.
  Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll'd:
  Give me to seize rich Nestor's shield of gold;
  From Tydeus' shoulders strip the costly load,
  Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god:
  These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!
  This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!"

  That heard, deep anguish stung Saturnia's soul;
  She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole:
  And thus to Neptune: "Thou, whose force can make
  The stedfast earth from her foundations shake,
  Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppress'd,
  Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast?
  Yet Ãgae, Helice, thy power obey,(195)
  And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay.
  Would all the deities of Greece combine,
  In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine:
  Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,
  And see his Trojans to the shades descend:
  Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;
  Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!"

  Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:
  "What rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
  I war not with the highest. All above
  Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove."

  Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might
  Jove gave the glory of the destined fight,
  Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields
  With close-ranged chariots, and with thicken'd shields.
  Where the deep trench in length extended lay,
  Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,
  A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat
  With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
  The king of men, by Juno's self inspired,
  Toil'd through the tents, and all his army fired.
  Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand
  His purple robe, bright ensign of command.
  High on the midmost bark the king appear'd:
  There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard:
  To Ajax and Achilles reach'd the sound,
  Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
  "O Argives! shame of human race! (he cried:
  The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)
  Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore,
  Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
  Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes,
  While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
  But who to meet one martial man is found,
  When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
  O mighty Jove! O sire of the distress'd!
  Was ever king like me, like me oppress'd?
  With power immense, with justice arm'd in vain;
  My glory ravish'd, and my people slain!
  To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
  What altar smoked not with our victims' gore?
  With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
  And ask'd destruction to the Trojan name.
  Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
  Give these at least to 'scape from Hector's hand,
  And save the relics of the Grecian land!"

  Thus pray'd the king, and heaven's great father heard
  His vows, in bitterness of soul preferr'd:
  The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,
  And gives the people to their monarch's prayers.
  His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent,
  A fawn his talons truss'd, (divine portent!)
  High o'er the wondering hosts he soar'd above,
  Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;
  Then let the prey before his altar fall;
  The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:
  Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive,
  And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
  Tydides first, of all the Grecian force,
  O'er the broad ditch impell'd his foaming horse,
  Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,
  And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
  Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)
  With flying coursers shunn'd his dreadful ire;
  Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppress'd;
  The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:
  Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound;
  His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
  Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed;
  The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed:
  Meriones, like Mars in arms renown'd,
  And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound;
  Evaemon's son next issues to the foe,
  And last young Teucer with his bended bow.
  Secure behind the Telamonian shield
  The skilful archer wide survey'd the field,
  With every shaft some hostile victim slew,
  Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew:
  The conscious infant so, when fear alarms,
  Retires for safety to the mother's arms.
  Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field,
  Moves as he moves, and turns the shining shield.
  Who first by Teucer's mortal arrows bled?
  Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead:
  The godlike Lycophon next press'd the plain,
  With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain:
  Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground;
  The bloody pile great Melanippus crown'd.
  Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art,
  A Trojan ghost attending every dart.
  Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye
  The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly:
  "O youth forever dear! (the monarch cried)
  Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried;
  Thy brave example shall retrieve our host,
  Thy country's saviour, and thy father's boast!
  Sprung from an alien's bed thy sire to grace,
  The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace:
  Proud of his boy, he own'd the generous flame,
  And the brave son repays his cares with fame.
  Now hear a monarch's vow: If heaven's high powers
  Give me to raze Troy's long-defended towers;
  Whatever treasures Greece for me design,
  The next rich honorary gift be thine:
  Some golden tripod, or distinguished car,
  With coursers dreadful in the ranks of war:
  Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve,
  Shall recompense the warrior's toils with love."

  To this the chief: "With praise the rest inspire,
  Nor urge a soul already fill'd with fire.
  What strength I have, be now in battle tried,
  Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.
  Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe,
  Still aim'd at Hector have I bent my bow:
  Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled,
  And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead:
  But sure some god denies me to destroy
  This fury of the field, this dog of Troy."

  He said, and twang'd the string. The weapon flies
  At Hector's breast, and sings along the skies:
  He miss'd the mark; but pierced Gorgythio's heart,
  And drench'd in royal blood the thirsty dart.
  (Fair Castianira, nymph of form divine,
  This offspring added to king Priam's line.)
  As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,(196)
  Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain;
  So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depress'd
  Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast.
  Another shaft the raging archer drew,
  That other shaft with erring fury flew,
  (From Hector, Phoebus turn'd the flying wound,)
  Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground:
  Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore,
  And dipp'd its feathers in no vulgar gore.
  Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms
  The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
  Hector with grief his charioteer beheld
  All pale and breathless on the sanguine field:
  Then bids Cebriones direct the rein,
  Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain.
  Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took,
  And rush'd on Teucer with the lifted rock.
  The youth already strain'd the forceful yew;
  The shaft already to his shoulder drew;
  The feather in his hand, just wing'd for flight,
  Touch'd where the neck and hollow chest unite;
  There, where the juncture knits the channel bone,
  The furious chief discharged the craggy stone:
  The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,
  And his numb'd hand dismiss'd his useless bow.
  He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display'd,
  And screen'd his brother with the mighty shade;
  Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore
  The batter'd archer groaning to the shore.

  Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire,
  He arm'd their hands, and fill'd their breasts with fire.
  The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,
  Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
  First of the foe, great Hector march'd along,
  With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong.
  As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,
  With beating bosom, and with eager pace,
  Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,
  Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels;
  Thus oft the Grecians turn'd, but still they flew;
  Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
  When flying they had pass'd the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;
  Before the ships a desperate stand they made,
  And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
  Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:
  His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame
  That wither'd all their host: like Mars he stood:
  Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
  Their strong distress the wife of Jove survey'd;
  Then pensive thus, to war's triumphant maid:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
  Now, in this moment of her last despair,
  Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care,
  Condemn'd to suffer the full force of fate,
  And drain the dregs of heaven's relentless hate?
  Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
  What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
  What power divine shall Hector's wrath assuage?
  Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!"

  So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
  To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:

  "Long since had Hector stain'd these fields with gore,
  Stretch'd by some Argive on his native shore:
  But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands,
  Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands;
  The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,
  Forgets my service and deserved reward:
  Saved I, for this, his favourite son distress'd,
  By stern Eurystheus with long labours press'd?
  He begg'd, with tears he begg'd, in deep dismay;
  I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day.
  Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,
  When to grim Pluto's gloomy gates he went;
  The triple dog had never felt his chain,
  Nor Styx been cross'd, nor hell explored in vain.
  Averse to me of all his heaven of gods,
  At Thetis' suit the partial Thunderer nods;
  To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son,
  My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
  Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved
  To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.
  Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;
  Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side.
  Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?
  (That terror of the Greeks, that man of men)
  When Juno's self, and Pallas shall appear,
  All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
  What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,
  Expiring, pale, and terrible no more,
  Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?"

  She ceased, and Juno rein'd the steeds with care:
  (Heaven's awful empress, Saturn's other heir:)
  Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,
  With flowers adorn'd, with art immortal crown'd;
  The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove
  Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.
  Her father's arms her mighty limbs invest,
  His cuirass blazes on her ample breast.
  The vigorous power the trembling car ascends:
  Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends:
  Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns
  Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

  Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly;
  Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
  Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,
  Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.
  Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
  The sun's bright portals and the skies command;
  Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day
  Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.
  The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
  Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide.
  But Jove, incensed, from Ida's top survey'd,
  And thus enjoin'd the many-colour'd maid.

       [Illustration: JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.]

               JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.


  "Thaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car;
  Against the highest who shall wage the war?
  If furious yet they dare the vain debate,
  Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate:
  Their coursers crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
  Their car in fragments, scatter'd o'er the sky:
  My lightning these rebellious shall confound,
  And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground,
  Condemn'd for ten revolving years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall Minerva learn to fear our ire,
  Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress our will."

  Swift as the wind, the various-colour'd maid
  From Ida's top her golden wings display'd;
  To great Olympus' shining gate she flies,
  There meets the chariot rushing down the skies,
  Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,
  And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.

  "What frenzy goddesses! what rage can move
  Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
  Desist, obedient to his high command:
  This is his word; and know his word shall stand:
  His lightning your rebellion shall confound,
  And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;
  Your horses crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
  Your car in fragments scatter'd o'er the sky;
  Yourselves condemn'd ten rolling years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,
  Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress his will:
  But thee, what desperate insolence has driven
  To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?"

  Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind,
  She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign'd:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
  No more let beings of superior birth
  Contend with Jove for this low race of earth;
  Triumphant now, now miserably slain,
  They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:
  But Jove's high counsels full effect shall find;
  And, ever constant, ever rule mankind."

  She spoke, and backward turn'd her steeds of light,
  Adorn'd with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
  The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,
  And heap'd their mangers with ambrosial food.
  There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;
  The chariot propp'd against the crystal walls,
  The pensive goddesses, abash'd, controll'd,
  Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.

       [Illustration: THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.]

               THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.


  And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
  From Ida's summits to the Olympian height.
  Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
  Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
  'Twas Neptune's charge his coursers to unbrace,
  And fix the car on its immortal base;
  There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
  Till with a snowy veil he screen'd the blaze.
  He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
  The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
  High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
  And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
  Trembling afar the offending powers appear'd,
  Confused and silent, for his frown they fear'd.
  He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
  "Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
  Soon was your battle o'er: proud Troy retired
  Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
  But know, whoe'er almighty power withstand!
  Unmatch'd our force, unconquer'd is our hand:
  Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
  Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
  Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
  And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
  For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
  What power soe'er provokes our lifted hand,
  On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
  Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race."

  Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
  But feast their souls on Ilion's woes to come.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
  "What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
  Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
  'Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
  For Greece we grieve, abandon'd by her fate
  To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
  Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
  Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove."

  The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
  Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

  "The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
  Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
  What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
  Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
  Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
  The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
  Even till the day when certain fates ordain
  That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
  Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
  For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
  With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
  Fly, if thy wilt, to earth's remotest bound,
  Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
  Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
  Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
  No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there;
  No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
  There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
  And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand."

  Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
  And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
  The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay'd;
  The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

  The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
  A martial council near the navy walls;
  These to Scamander's bank apart he led,
  Where thinly scatter'd lay the heaps of dead.
  The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
  Attend his order, and their prince surround.
  A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length;
  The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
  Fix'd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
  The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
  And, bending forward, thus reveal'd his mind:

  "Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
  Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
  This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
  Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
  But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
  And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
  Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
  Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
  Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
  And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought
  Wide o'er the field, high blazing to the sky,
  Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
  The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
  Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
  Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
  Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
  Not unmolested let the wretches gain
  Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
  Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
  Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
  Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses' care.
  And warn their children from a Trojan war.
  Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
  Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
  To bid the sires with hoary honours crown'd,
  And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
  Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
  And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
  Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
  The insidious foe the naked town invade.
  Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;
  A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
  The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector's hand
  From these detested foes to free the land,
  Who plough'd, with fates averse, the watery way:
  For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
  Our common safety must be now the care;
  But soon as morning paints the fields of air,
  Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage,
  And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
  Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove
  Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
  To-morrow's light (O haste the glorious morn!)
  Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,
  With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored,
  And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
  Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,
  From age inglorious, and black death secure;
  So might my life and glory know no bound,
  Like Pallas worshipp'd, like the sun renown'd!
  As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,
  Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy."

  The leader spoke. From all his host around
  Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
  Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
  And fix'd their headstalls to his chariot-side.
  Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led,
  With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,
  Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore:
  The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
  Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers!(197)
  Whose wrath hung heavy o'er the Trojan towers:
  Nor Priam nor his sons obtain'd their grace;
  Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.

  The troops exulting sat in order round,
  And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
  As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,(198)
  O'er heaven's pure azure spreads her sacred light,
  When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
  And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene,
  Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
  And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,
  O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
  And tip with silver every mountain's head:
  Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
  A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:
  The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
  Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
  So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,
  And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
  The long reflections of the distant fires
  Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
  A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild,
  And shoot a shady lustre o'er the field.
  Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend,
  Whose umber'd arms, by fits, thick flashes send,
  Loud neigh the coursers o'er their heaps of corn,
  And ardent warriors wait the rising morn.

                 [Illustration: THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.]

                         THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.





BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.

THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.

Agamemnon, after the last day's defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit the
siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to be
strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are to be
followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and Nestor
further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in order to
move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are
accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very moving and
pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by Achilles, who
notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The ambassadors return
unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.

This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, which
is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene lies on
the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.

  Thus joyful Troy maintain'd the watch of night;
  While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,(199)
  And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
  Sat on each face, and sadden'd every heart.
  As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
  A double tempest of the west and north
  Swells o'er the sea, from Thracia's frozen shore,
  Heaps waves on waves, and bids the Ãgean roar:
  This way and that the boiling deeps are toss'd:
  Such various passions urged the troubled host,
  Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
  Superior sorrows swell'd his royal breast;
  Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
  To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
  But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
  In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
  The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
  Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
  So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
  In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
  With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress'd;
  Words, mix'd with sighs, thus bursting from his breast:

  "Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader's care;
  Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
  Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
  And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
  A safe return was promised to our toils,
  With conquest honour'd and enrich'd with spoils:
  Now shameful flight alone can save the host;
  Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
  So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
  Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,
  Who shakes the feeble props of human trust,
  And towers and armies humbles to the dust.
  Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
  Haste to the joys our native country yields;
  Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy."

  He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
  Silent, unmov'd in dire dismay they stand;
  A pensive scene! till Tydeus' warlike son
  Roll'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
  "When kings advise us to renounce our fame,
  First let him speak who first has suffer'd shame.
  If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
  The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
  Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
  Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
  Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear'd,
  The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
  The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
  The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
  They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
  They gave dominion o'er the seas and land;
  The noblest power that might the world control
  They gave thee not--a brave and virtuous soul.
  Is this a general's voice, that would suggest
  Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
  Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
  And if we fly, 'tis what our king commands.
  Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain;
  Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main;
  A noble care the Grecians shall employ,
  To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
  Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,
  Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire;
  Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;
  God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came."

  He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,
  And voice to voice resounds Tydides' praise.
  Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rear'd;
  He spoke: the host in still attention heard:(200)

  "O truly great! in whom the gods have join'd
  Such strength of body with such force of mind:
  In conduct, as in courage, you excel,
  Still first to act what you advise so well.
  These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves,
  Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
  Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:
  And blame even kings with praise, because with truth.
  And yet those years that since thy birth have run
  Would hardly style thee Nestor's youngest son.
  Then let me add what yet remains behind,
  A thought unfinish'd in that generous mind;
  Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring
  Distaste the people, or offend the king:

  "Cursed is the man, and void of law and right,
  Unworthy property, unworthy light,
  Unfit for public rule, or private care,
  That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
  Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
  To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
  This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
  Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
  Be that the duty of the young and bold;
  But thou, O king, to council call the old;
  Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
  Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
  With Thracian wines recruit thy honour'd guests,
  For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
  Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress'd,
  And such a monarch as can choose the best.
  See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
  How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
  Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
  What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
  This dreadful interval determines all;
  To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall."

  Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
  Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
  His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
  The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown'd:
  Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
  The double offspring of the warrior-god:
  Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
  And Lycomed of Creon's noble line.
  Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
  And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
  The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
  Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

  The king of men, on public counsels bent,
  Convened the princes in his ample tent,
  Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
  But stay'd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
  Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
  And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

  "Monarch of nations! whose superior sway
  Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
  The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
  And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
  O king! the counsels of my age attend;
  With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
  Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
  Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,
  To see no wholesome motion be withstood,
  And ratify the best for public good.
  Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
  But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
  Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
  At once my present judgment and my past.
  When from Pelides' tent you forced the maid,
  I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
  But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
  You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
  Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
  With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend."

  To whom the king. "With justice hast thou shown
  A prince's faults, and I with reason own.
  That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
  Is more than armies, and himself a host.
  Bless'd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
  Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
  Fain would my heart, which err'd through frantic rage,
  The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
  If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,(201)
  Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatch'd in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath the hero's arms:
  All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
  And join'd with these the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis I resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,(202)
  These instant shall be his; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass his loaded navy's sides:
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown his warm embrace,
  Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shall he live my son, our honours share,
  And with Orestes' self divide my care.
  Yet more--three daughters in my court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed;
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,(203)
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
  Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
  I ask no presents, no reward for love:
  Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
  Him Enope, and Pherae him obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus for vines renown'd;
  Ãpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:(204)
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
  There shall he reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  All this I give, his vengeance to control,
  And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
  Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
  Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
  Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell's abodes,
  And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods
  Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
  Since more than his my years, and more my sway."

                          [Illustration: PLUTO.]

                                  PLUTO.


  The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
  "Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
  Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
  And such as fits a generous king to make.
  Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
  (Myself will name them) to Pelides' tent.
  Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age,
  Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
  Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
  Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
  Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
  Pray in deep silence,(205) and with purest hands."(206)

                 [Illustration: THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.]

                         THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


  He said; and all approved. The heralds bring
  The cleansing water from the living spring.
  The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown'd,
  And large libations drench'd the sands around.
  The rite perform'd, the chiefs their thirst allay,
  Then from the royal tent they take their way;
  Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye,
  Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;
  Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
  To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
  Through the still night they march, and hear the roar
  Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
  To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,
  Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround,
  They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,
  And calm the rage of stern Ãacides.
  And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay
  The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay;
  Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
  Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
  (The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;
  Of polish'd silver was its costly frame.)
  With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
  The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
  Patroclus only of the royal train,
  Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
  Full opposite he sat, and listen'd long,
  In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
  Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds
  To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
  Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied,
  Leap'd from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
  With like surprise arose Menoetius' son:
  Pelides grasp'd their hands, and thus begun:

  "Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.
  Or strong necessity, or urgent fear;
  Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;
  To me more dear than all that bear the name."

  With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,
  And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
  Then thus--"Patroclus, crown a larger bowl,
  Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
  Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
  Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend."

  He said: Patroclus o'er the blazing fire
  Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
  The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
  Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
  Achilles at the genial feast presides,
  The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
  Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
  The tent is brighten'd with the rising blaze:
  Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
  He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
  Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
  And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Menoetius' son bestow'd;
  Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
  Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
  The first fat offering to the immortals due,
  Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
  Then each, indulging in the social feast,
  His thirst and hunger soberly repress'd.
  That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign:
  Not unperceived; Ulysses crown'd with wine
  The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
  His speech addressing to the godlike man.

  "Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
  Not those more honour'd whom Atrides feasts:
  Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
  That, Agamemnon's regal tent affords;
  But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
  Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
  What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
  The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
  Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
  And owns no help but from thy saving hands:
  Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;
  Their threatening tents already shade our wall:
  Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim,
  And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
  For them the father of the gods declares,
  Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
  See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
  See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
  What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
  He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
  The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
  Heavens! how my country's woes distract my mind,
  Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design'd!
  And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay
  In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
  Return, Achilles: oh return, though late,
  To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate;
  If in that heart or grief or courage lies,
  Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
  The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,
  That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain:
  Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
  Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
  When Peleus in his aged arms embraced
  His parting son, these accents were his last:

  "'My child! with strength, with glory, and success,
  Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
  Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage
  To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:
  From gentler manners let thy glory grow,
  And shun contention, the sure source of woe;
  That young and old may in thy praise combine,
  The virtues of humanity be thine--'
  This now-despised advice thy father gave;
  Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
  If thou wilt yield to great Atrides' prayers,
  Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares;
  If not--but hear me, while I number o'er
  The proffer'd presents, an exhaustless store.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould;
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same he chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms.
  All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,
  And, join'd with these, the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis he'll resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were only thine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
  These instant shall be thine; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass thy loaded navy's sides.
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace;
  Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
  And with Orestes' self divide his care.
  Yet more--three daughters in his court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed:
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
  Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve;
  He asks no presents, no reward for love:
  Himself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway,
  The Enope and Pherae thee obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown'd:
  Ãpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main.
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
  There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
  Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
  But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
  If honour and if interest plead in vain,
  Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
  And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
  If no regard thy suffering country claim,
  Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
  For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
  Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
  Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
  And only triumphs to deserve thy hands."

  Then thus the goddess-born: "Ulysses, hear
  A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
  What in my secret soul is understood,
  My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
  Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
  Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
  Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
  My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

  "Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
  Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
  Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
  But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
  Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
  The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
  Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
  Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
  Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
  A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
  As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
  From danger guards them, and from want defends;
  In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
  And with the untasted food supplies her care:
  For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
  Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
  Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
  And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
  I sack'd twelve ample cities on the main,(207)
  And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
  Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
  The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
  Your mighty monarch these in peace possess'd;
  Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
  Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
  And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
  I only must refund, of all his train;
  See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
  My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
  My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
  The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
  But what's the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
  What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
  What calls for vengeance but a woman's cause?
  Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
  Beloved by none but those of Atreus' race?
  The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
  Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
  Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
  Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
  Wrong'd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
  Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
  Ye have my answer--what remains to do,
  Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
  What needs he the defence this arm can make?
  Has he not walls no human force can shake?
  Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
  With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
  And will not these (the wonders he has done)
  Repel the rage of Priam's single son?
  There was a time ('twas when for Greece I fought)
  When Hector's prowess no such wonders wrought;
  He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
  Achilles' fury at the Scaean gate;
  He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
  But now those ancient enmities are o'er;
  To-morrow we the favouring gods implore;
  Then shall you see our parting vessels crown'd,
  And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
  The third day hence shall Pthia greet our sails,(208)
  If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;
  Pthia to her Achilles shall restore
  The wealth he left for this detested shore:
  Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass,
  The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:
  My beauteous captives thither I'll convey,
  And all that rests of my unravish'd prey.
  One only valued gift your tyrant gave,
  And that resumed--the fair Lyrnessian slave.
  Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
  And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear;
  (For arm'd in impudence, mankind he braves,
  And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
  Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes
  Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;)
  Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
  Nor share his council, nor his battle join;
  For once deceiv'd, was his; but twice were mine,
  No--let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives
  Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives;
  His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind
  Stand but as slaves before a noble mind,
  Not though he proffer'd all himself possess'd,
  And all his rapine could from others wrest:
  Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown
  The many-peopled Orchomenian town;(209)
  Not all proud Thebes' unrivall'd walls contain,
  The world's great empress on the Egyptian plain
  (That spreads her conquests o'er a thousand states,
  And pours her heroes through a hundred gates,
  Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars
  From each wide portal issuing to the wars);(210)
  Though bribes were heap'd on bribes, in number more
  Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
  Should all these offers for my friendship call,
  'Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
  Atrides' daughter never shall be led
  (An ill-match'd consort) to Achilles' bed;
  Like golden Venus though she charm'd the heart,
  And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
  Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
  I hate alliance with a tyrant's race.
  If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
  The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
  Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
  And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
  Bless'd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
  Content with just hereditary sway;
  There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
  Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
  Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
  Not all Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
  Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
  Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
  Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
  And steeds unrivall'd on the dusty plain:
  But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
  Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
  My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
  And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
  Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
  Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
  If I return, I quit immortal praise
  For years on years, and long-extended days.
  Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
  And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
  To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
  Jove's arm display'd asserts her from the skies!
  Her hearts are strengthen'd, and her glories rise.
  Go then to Greece, report our fix'd design;
  Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
  Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
  To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
  One stratagem has fail'd, and others will:
  Ye find, Achilles is unconquer'd still.
  Go then--digest my message as ye may--
  But here this night let reverend Phoenix stay:
  His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand
  A peaceful death in Pthia's friendly land.
  But whether he remain or sail with me,
  His age be sacred, and his will be free."

                      [Illustration: GREEK GALLEY.]

                              GREEK GALLEY.


  The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around
  In silence wrapt, in consternation drown'd,
  Attend the stern reply. Then Phoenix rose;
  (Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)
  And while the fate of suffering Greece he mourn'd,
  With accent weak these tender words return'd.

                       [Illustration: PROSERPINE.]

                               PROSERPINE.


  "Divine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,
  And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
  If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind,
  How shall thy friend, thy Phoenix, stay behind?
  The royal Peleus, when from Pthia's coast
  He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
  Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill'd,
  And new to perils of the direful field:
  He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
  To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
  Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
  No time shall part us, and no fate divide,
  Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore
  The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore,
  When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames
  (Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames),
  My father faithless to my mother's arms,
  Old as he was, adored a stranger's charms.
  I tried what youth could do (at her desire)
  To win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
  My sire with curses loads my hated head,
  And cries, 'Ye furies! barren be his bed.'
  Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,
  And ruthless Proserpine, confirm'd his vow.
  Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
  Gods! what a crime my impious heart design'd!
  I thought (but some kind god that thought suppress'd)
  To plunge the poniard in my father's breast;
  Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
  With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
  On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
  They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
  Strong guards they placed, and watch'd nine nights entire;
  The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
  The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
  And, favour'd by the night, o'erleap'd the wall,
  My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
  In Phthia's court at last my labours end.
  Your sire received me, as his son caress'd,
  With gifts enrich'd, and with possessions bless'd.
  The strong Dolopians thenceforth own'd my reign,
  And all the coast that runs along the main.
  By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
  And early wisdom to thy soul convey'd:
  Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
  A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
  Thy infant breast a like affection show'd;
  Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load)
  Or at my knee, by Phoenix wouldst thou stand;
  No food was grateful but from Phoenix' hand.(211)
  I pass my watchings o'er thy helpless years,
  The tender labours, the compliant cares,
  The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree,
  And Phoenix felt a father's joys in thee:
  Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
  And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
  Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign'd;
  A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:
  The gods (the only great, and only wise)
  Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;
  Offending man their high compassion wins,
  And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
  Prayers are Jove's daughters, of celestial race,
  Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face;
  With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,
  Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
  Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
  Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o'er mankind,
  While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
  Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove,
  For him they mediate to the throne above
  When man rejects the humble suit they make,
  The sire revenges for the daughters' sake;
  From Jove commission'd, fierce injustice then
  Descends to punish unrelenting men.
  O let not headlong passion bear the sway
  These reconciling goddesses obey
  Due honours to the seed of Jove belong,
  Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
  Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring,
  Were rage still harbour'd in the haughty king;
  Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage
  Thy friend to plead against so just a rage.
  But since what honour asks the general sends,
  And sends by those whom most thy heart commends;
  The best and noblest of the Grecian train;
  Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
  Let me (my son) an ancient fact unfold,
  A great example drawn from times of old;
  Hear what our fathers were, and what their praise,
  Who conquer'd their revenge in former days.

  "Where Calydon on rocky mountains stands(212)
  Once fought the Ãtolian and Curetian bands;
  To guard it those; to conquer, these advance;
  And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance.
  The silver Cynthia bade contention rise,
  In vengeance of neglected sacrifice;
  On OEneus fields she sent a monstrous boar,
  That levell'd harvests, and whole forests tore:
  This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain)
  Great Meleager stretch'd along the plain,
  Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose,
  The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.
  Strong as they were, the bold Curetes fail'd,
  While Meleager's thundering arm prevail'd:
  Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast
  (For rage invades the wisest and the best).

  "Cursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields,
  And in his wife's embrace forgets the fields.
  (She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,
  And matchless Idas, more than man in war:
  The god of day adored the mother's charms;
  Against the god the father bent his arms:
  The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim,
  From Cleopatra changed their daughter's name,
  And call'd Alcyone; a name to show
  The father's grief, the mourning mother's woe.)
  To her the chief retired from stern debate,
  But found no peace from fierce Althaea's hate:
  Althaea's hate the unhappy warrior drew,
  Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew;
  She beat the ground, and call'd the powers beneath
  On her own son to wreak her brother's death;
  Hell heard her curses from the realms profound,
  And the red fiends that walk the nightly round.
  In vain Ãtolia her deliverer waits,
  War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
  She sent ambassadors, a chosen band,
  Priests of the gods, and elders of the land;
  Besought the chief to save the sinking state:
  Their prayers were urgent, and their proffers great:
  (Full fifty acres of the richest ground,
  Half pasture green, and half with vineyards crown'd:)
  His suppliant father, aged OEneus, came;
  His sisters follow'd; even the vengeful dame,
  Althaea, sues; his friends before him fall:
  He stands relentless, and rejects them all.
  Meanwhile the victor's shouts ascend the skies;
  The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise;
  At length his wife (a form divine) appears,
  With piercing cries, and supplicating tears;
  She paints the horrors of a conquer'd town,
  The heroes slain, the palaces o'erthrown,
  The matrons ravish'd, the whole race enslaved:
  The warrior heard, he vanquish'd, and he saved.
  The Ãtolians, long disdain'd, now took their turn,
  And left the chief their broken faith to mourn.
  Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious ire,
  Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire;
  Accept the presents; draw thy conquering sword;
  And be amongst our guardian gods adored."

  Thus he: the stern Achilles thus replied:
  "My second father, and my reverend guide:
  Thy friend, believe me, no such gifts demands,
  And asks no honours from a mortal's hands;
  Jove honours me, and favours my designs;
  His pleasure guides me, and his will confines;
  And here I stay (if such his high behest)
  While life's warm spirit beats within my breast.
  Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart:
  No more molest me on Atrides' part:
  Is it for him these tears are taught to flow,
  For him these sorrows? for my mortal foe?
  A generous friendship no cold medium knows,
  Burns with one love, with one resentment glows;
  One should our interests and our passions be;
  My friend must hate the man that injures me.
  Do this, my Phoenix, 'tis a generous part;
  And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.
  Let these return: our voyage, or our stay,
  Rest undetermined till the dawning day."

  He ceased; then order'd for the sage's bed
  A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
  With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke,
  And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:

  "Hence let us go--why waste we time in vain?
  See what effect our low submissions gain!
  Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
  The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
  Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
  Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
  Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
  On just atonement, we remit the deed;
  A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
  The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
  The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
  And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.(213)
  The gods that unrelenting breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
  One woman-slave was ravish'd from thy arms:
  Lo, seven are offer'd, and of equal charms.
  Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
  Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
  And know the men of all the Grecian host,
  Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most."

  "O soul of battles, and thy people's guide!
  (To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
  Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant's name
  My rage rekindles, and my soul's on flame:
  'Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the vilest slave!
  Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
  The glorious combat is no more my care;
  Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
  The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
  Not till the flames, by Hector's fury thrown,
  Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
  Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
  There cease his battle, and there feel our hand."

  This said, each prince a double goblet crown'd,
  And cast a large libation on the ground;
  Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,
  The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
  Meantime Achilles' slaves prepared a bed,
  With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:
  There, till the sacred morn restored the day,
  In slumber sweet the reverend Phoenix lay.
  But in his inner tent, an ampler space,
  Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace
  Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race.
  Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared,
  Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared;
  Achilles to his friend consign'd her charms
  When Scyros fell before his conquering arms.

  And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had sent,
  Pass'd through the hosts, and reach'd the royal tent.
  Then rising all, with goblets in their hands,
  The peers and leaders of the Achaian bands
  Hail'd their return: Atrides first begun:

  "Say what success? divine Laertes' son!
  Achilles' high resolves declare to all:
  "Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?"

  "Great king of nations! (Ithacus replied)
  Fix'd is his wrath, unconquer'd is his pride;
  He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns,
  And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns.
  To save our army, and our fleets to free,
  Is not his care; but left to Greece and thee.
  Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky,
  Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly;
  Us too he bids our oars and sails employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy;
  For Jove o'ershades her with his arm divine,
  Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.
  Such was his word: what further he declared,
  These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.
  But Phoenix in his tent the chief retains,
  Safe to transport him to his native plains
  When morning dawns; if other he decree,
  His age is sacred, and his choice is free."

  Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host,
  With sorrow seized, in consternation lost,
  Attend the stern reply. Tydides broke
  The general silence, and undaunted spoke.
  "Why should we gifts to proud Achilles send,
  Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend?
  His country's woes he glories to deride,
  And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
  Be the fierce impulse of his rage obey'd,
  Our battles let him or desert or aid;
  Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit:
  That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:
  What for ourselves we can, is always ours;
  This night, let due repast refresh our powers;
  (For strength consists in spirits and in blood,
  And those are owed to generous wine and food;)
  But when the rosy messenger of day
  Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray,
  Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine
  In flaming arms, a long-extended line:
  In the dread front let great Atrides stand,
  The first in danger, as in high command."

  Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,
  Then each to Heaven the due libations pays;
  Till sleep, descending o'er the tents, bestows
  The grateful blessings of desired repose."(214)

                        [Illustration: ACHILLES.]

                                ACHILLES.





BOOK X.


ARGUMENT.

THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.

Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, and
Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call a
council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemies' camp, to
learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed undertakes this
hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for his companion. In
their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had sent on a like design
to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are informed of the situation
of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and particularly of Rhesus, and the
Thracians who were lately arrived. They pass on with success; kill Rhesus,
with several of his officers, and seize the famous horses of that prince,
with which they return in triumph to the camp.

The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps.

  All night the chiefs before their vessels lay,
  And lost in sleep the labours of the day:
  All but the king: with various thoughts oppress'd,(215)
  His country's cares lay rolling in his breast.
  As when by lightnings Jove's ethereal power
  Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower,
  Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore,
  Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar;
  By fits one flash succeeds as one expires,
  And heaven flames thick with momentary fires:
  So bursting frequent from Atrides' breast,
  Sighs following sighs his inward fears confess'd.
  Now o'er the fields, dejected, he surveys
  From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze;
  Hears in the passing wind their music blow,
  And marks distinct the voices of the foe.
  Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast,
  Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
  He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove,
  And sues to him that ever lives above:
  Inly he groans; while glory and despair
  Divide his heart, and wage a double war.

  A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves;
  To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves,
  With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate
  What yet remains to save the afflicted state.
  He rose, and first he cast his mantle round,
  Next on his feet the shining sandals bound;
  A lion's yellow spoils his back conceal'd;
  His warlike hand a pointed javelin held.
  Meanwhile his brother, press'd with equal woes,
  Alike denied the gifts of soft repose,
  Laments for Greece, that in his cause before
  So much had suffer'd and must suffer more.
  A leopard's spotted hide his shoulders spread:
  A brazen helmet glitter'd on his head:
  Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went
  To wake Atrides in the royal tent.
  Already waked, Atrides he descried,
  His armour buckling at his vessel's side.
  Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:
  "Why puts my brother his bright armour on?
  Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours,
  To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers?
  But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
  Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask;
  Guideless, alone, through night's dark shade to go,
  And midst a hostile camp explore the foe."

  To whom the king: "In such distress we stand,
  No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;
  Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
  But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
  For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies,
  And bows his head to Hector's sacrifice.
  What eye has witness'd, or what ear believed,
  In one great day, by one great arm achieved,
  Such wondrous deeds as Hector's hand has done,
  And we beheld, the last revolving sun
  What honours the beloved of Jove adorn!
  Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;
  Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
  And curse the battle where their fathers fell.

  "Now speed thy hasty course along the fleet,
  There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete;
  Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;
  To keep the guards on duty be his care,
  (For Nestor's influence best that quarter guides,
  Whose son with Merion, o'er the watch presides.")
  To whom the Spartan: "These thy orders borne,
  Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?"
  "There shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,)
  Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,
  The paths so many, and the camp so wide.
  Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise,
  Urge by their fathers' fame their future praise.
  Forget we now our state and lofty birth;
  Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.
  To labour is the lot of man below;
  And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe."

  This said, each parted to his several cares:
  The king to Nestor's sable ship repairs;
  The sage protector of the Greeks he found
  Stretch'd in his bed with all his arms around
  The various-colour'd scarf, the shield he rears,
  The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
  The dreadful weapons of the warrior's rage,
  That, old in arms, disdain'd the peace of age.
  Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,
  The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said:

  "What art thou, speak, that on designs unknown,
  While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;
  Seek'st thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
  Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell."

  "O son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoin'd,)
  Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
  Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
  The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,
  Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,
  And woes, that only with his life shall end!
  Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
  And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
  No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,
  Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
  With fears distracted, with no fix'd design;
  And all my people's miseries are mine.
  If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
  (Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)
  Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend;
  Now let us jointly to the trench descend,
  At every gate the fainting guard excite,
  Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;
  Else may the sudden foe our works invade,
  So near, and favour'd by the gloomy shade."

  To him thus Nestor: "Trust the powers above,
  Nor think proud Hector's hopes confirm'd by Jove:
  How ill agree the views of vain mankind,
  And the wise counsels of the eternal mind!
  Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain
  That great Achilles rise and rage again,
  What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
  Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys;
  The care is next our other chiefs to raise:
  Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need;
  Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed.
  Some other be despatch'd of nimbler feet,
  To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,
  Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.(216)
  To rouse the Spartan I myself decree;
  Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee,
  Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no share
  With his great brother in his martial care:
  Him it behoved to every chief to sue,
  Preventing every part perform'd by you;
  For strong necessity our toils demands,
  Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands."

  To whom the king: "With reverence we allow
  Thy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now:
  My generous brother is of gentle kind,
  He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind;
  Through too much deference to our sovereign sway,
  Content to follow when we lead the way:
  But now, our ills industrious to prevent,
  Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my tent.
  The chiefs you named, already at his call,
  Prepare to meet us near the navy-wall;
  Assembling there, between the trench and gates,
  Near the night-guards, our chosen council waits."

  "Then none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand,
  For great examples justify command."
  With that, the venerable warrior rose;
  The shining greaves his manly legs enclose;
  His purple mantle golden buckles join'd,
  Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined.
  Then rushing from his tent, he snatch'd in haste
  His steely lance, that lighten'd as he pass'd.
  The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd,
  Stopp'd at Ulysses' tent, and call'd aloud.
  Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent,
  Awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent.
  "What new distress, what sudden cause of fright,
  Thus leads you wandering in the silent night?"
  "O prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied)
  Wise as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried:
  Whatever means of safety can be sought,
  Whatever counsels can inspire our thought,
  Whatever methods, or to fly or fight;
  All, all depend on this important night!"
  He heard, return'd, and took his painted shield;
  Then join'd the chiefs, and follow'd through the field.
  Without his tent, bold Diomed they found,
  All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round:
  Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,
  His head reclining on his bossy shield.
  A wood of spears stood by, that, fix'd upright,
  Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
  A bull's black hide composed the hero's bed;
  A splendid carpet roll'd beneath his head.
  Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes
  The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:

  "Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
  Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
  But sleep'st thou now, when from yon hill the foe
  Hangs o'er the fleet, and shades our walls below?"

  At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;
  The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said:
  "Wondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,
  Though years and honours bid thee seek repose,
  Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;
  Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake."
  "My friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;
  These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;
  Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire
  To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:
  But now the last despair surrounds our host;
  No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;
  Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife,
  Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:
  Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage,
  Employ thy youth as I employ my age;
  Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest;
  He serves me most, who serves his country best."

  This said, the hero o'er his shoulders flung
  A lion's spoils, that to his ankles hung;
  Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.
  Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
  The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.

  And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;
  A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared:
  The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,
  And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
  So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,
  With toil protected from the prowling train;
  When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold,
  Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold:
  Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear;
  Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear
  Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around,
  Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
  Thus watch'd the Grecians, cautious of surprise,
  Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes:
  Each step of passing feet increased the affright;
  And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
  Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey'd,
  And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
  "'Tis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ;
  Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.
  Watch thus, and Greece shall live." The hero said;
  Then o'er the trench the following chieftains led.
  His son, and godlike Merion, march'd behind
  (For these the princes to their council join'd).
  The trenches pass'd, the assembled kings around
  In silent state the consistory crown'd.
  A place there was, yet undefiled with gore,
  The spot where Hector stopp'd his rage before;
  When night descending, from his vengeful hand
  Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band:
  (The plain beside with mangled corps was spread,
  And all his progress mark'd by heaps of dead:)
  There sat the mournful kings: when Neleus' son,
  The council opening, in these words begun:

  "Is there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,
  His life to hazard, and his country save?
  Lives there a man, who singly dares to go
  To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
  Or favour'd by the night approach so near,
  Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
  If to besiege our navies they prepare,
  Or Troy once more must be the seat of war?
  This could he learn, and to our peers recite,
  And pass unharm'd the dangers of the night;
  What fame were his through all succeeding days,
  While Phoebus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
  What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
  What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
  A sable ewe each leader should provide,
  With each a sable lambkin by her side;
  At every rite his share should be increased,
  And his the foremost honours of the feast."

  Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,
  Tydides spoke--"The man you seek is here.
  Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way,
  Some god within commands, and I obey.
  But let some other chosen warrior join,
  To raise my hopes, and second my design.
  By mutual confidence and mutual aid,
  Great deeds are done, and great discoveries made;
  The wise new prudence from the wise acquire,
  And one brave hero fans another's fire."

  Contending leaders at the word arose;
  Each generous breast with emulation glows;
  So brave a task each Ajax strove to share,
  Bold Merion strove, and Nestor's valiant heir;
  The Spartan wish'd the second place to gain,
  And great Ulysses wish'd, nor wish'd in vain.
  Then thus the king of men the contest ends:
  "Thou first of warriors, and thou best of friends,
  Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join
  In this great enterprise, is only thine.
  Just be thy choice, without affection made;
  To birth, or office, no respect be paid;
  Let worth determine here." The monarch spake,
  And inly trembled for his brother's sake.

  "Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin'd)
  My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
  How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
  To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
  A chief, whose safety is Minerva's care;
  So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war:
  Bless'd in his conduct, I no aid require;
  Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire."

  "It fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame,
  (Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:
  Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe,
  Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
  But let us haste--Night rolls the hours away,
  The reddening orient shows the coming day,
  The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,
  And of night's empire but a third remains."

  Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  In arms terrific their huge limbs they dress'd.
  A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,
  And ample buckler, to Tydides gave:
  Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,
  Short of its crest, and with no plume o'erspread:
  (Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:)
  No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
  Next him Ulysses took a shining sword,
  A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:
  A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound,
  (Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown'd;
  Soft wool within; without, in order spread,(217)
  A boar's white teeth grinn'd horrid o'er his head.
  This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus' son,
  Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,
  And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize
  Molus received, the pledge of social ties;
  The helmet next by Merion was possess'd,
  And now Ulysses' thoughtful temples press'd.
  Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,
  And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
  Just then, in sign she favour'd their intent,
  A long-wing'd heron great Minerva sent:
  This, though surrounding shades obscured their view.
  By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
  As from the right she soar'd, Ulysses pray'd,
  Hail'd the glad omen, and address'd the maid:

  "O daughter of that god whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield!
  O thou! for ever present in my way,
  Who all my motions, all my toils survey!
  Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade,
  Safe by thy succour to our ships convey'd,
  And let some deed this signal night adorn,
  To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn."

  Then godlike Diomed preferr'd his prayer:
  "Daughter of Jove, unconquer'd Pallas! hear.
  Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won,
  As thou defend'st the sire, defend the son.
  When on Ãsopus' banks the banded powers
  Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers,
  Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show,
  He went a legate, but return'd a foe:
  Then help'd by thee, and cover'd by thy shield,
  He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
  So now be present, O celestial maid!
  So still continue to the race thine aid!
  A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke,
  Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
  With ample forehead, and with spreading horns,
  Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns."
  The heroes pray'd, and Pallas from the skies
  Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
  Now, like two lions panting for the prey,
  With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way,
  Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain,
  Through dust, through blood, o'er arms, and hills of slain.

  Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy,
  On high designs the wakeful hours employ;
  The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed;
  Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed:

  "What glorious man, for high attempts prepared,
  Dares greatly venture for a rich reward?
  Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make,
  What watch they keep, and what resolves they take?
  If now subdued they meditate their flight,
  And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night?
  His be the chariot that shall please him most,
  Of all the plunder of the vanquish'd host;
  His the fair steeds that all the rest excel,
  And his the glory to have served so well."

  A youth there was among the tribes of Troy,
  Dolon his name, Eumedes' only boy,
  (Five girls beside the reverend herald told.)
  Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold;
  Not bless'd by nature with the charms of face,
  But swift of foot, and matchless in the race.
  "Hector! (he said) my courage bids me meet
  This high achievement, and explore the fleet:
  But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
  And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
  The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
  That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
  Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
  Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
  Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
  And all their counsels, all their aims betray."

  The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
  Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
  "Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
  Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
  By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
  And him alone the immortal steeds adorn."

  Thus Hector swore: the gods were call'd in vain,
  But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
  Across his back the bended bow he flung,
  A wolf's grey hide around his shoulders hung,
  A ferret's downy fur his helmet lined,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
  Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
  And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
  Scarce had he pass'd the steeds and Trojan throng,
  (Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
  When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
  Ulysses mark'd, and thus to Diomed;

  "O friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
  Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
  Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
  Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
  Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
  Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
  But if too swift of foot he flies before,
  Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
  Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
  And intercept his hoped return to Troy."

  With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd their head,
  (As Dolon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
  Along the path the spy unwary flew;
  Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
  So distant they, and such the space between,
  As when two teams of mules divide the green,
  (To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)
  When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
  Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they pass'd;
  Hector (he thought) had sent, and check'd his haste,
  Till scarce at distance of a javelin's throw,
  No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.
  As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind;
  Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind;
  Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,
  And from the herd still turn the flying prey:
  So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew;
  So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
  Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls,
  And mingles with the guards that watch the walls;
  When brave Tydides stopp'd; a gen'rous thought
  (Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought,
  Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance,
  And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.
  Then thus aloud: "Whoe'er thou art, remain;
  This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain."
  He said, and high in air the weapon cast,
  Which wilful err'd, and o'er his shoulder pass'd;
  Then fix'd in earth. Against the trembling wood
  The wretch stood propp'd, and quiver'd as he stood;
  A sudden palsy seized his turning head;
  His loose teeth chatter'd, and his colour fled;
  The panting warriors seize him as he stands,
  And with unmanly tears his life demands.

  "O spare my youth, and for the breath I owe,
  Large gifts of price my father shall bestow:
  Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told,
  And steel well-temper'd and refulgent gold."

  To whom Ulysses made this wise reply:
  "Whoe'er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
  What moves thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight,
  To roam the silent fields in dead of night?
  Cam'st thou the secrets of our camp to find,
  By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind?
  Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led,
  Through heaps of carnage, to despoil the dead?"

  Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look:
  (Still, as he spoke, his limbs with horror shook:)
  "Hither I came, by Hector's words deceived;
  Much did he promise, rashly I believed:
  No less a bribe than great Achilles' car,
  And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war,
  Urged me, unwilling, this attempt to make;
  To learn what counsels, what resolves you take:
  If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight,
  And, tired with toils, neglect the watch of night."

  "Bold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize,
  (Ulysses, with a scornful smile, replies,)
  Far other rulers those proud steeds demand,
  And scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand;
  Even great Achilles scarce their rage can tame,
  Achilles sprung from an immortal dame.
  But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
  Where lies encamp'd the Trojan chief to-night?
  Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep
  Their other princes? tell what watch they keep:
  Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are;
  Or here to combat, from their city far,
  Or back to Ilion's walls transfer the war?"

  Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes' son:
  "What Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
  Hector, the peers assembling in his tent,
  A council holds at Ilus' monument.
  No certain guards the nightly watch partake;
  Where'er yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake:
  Anxious for Troy, the guard the natives keep;
  Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces sleep,
  Whose wives and infants, from the danger far,
  Discharge their souls of half the fears of war."

  "Then sleep those aids among the Trojan train,
  (Inquired the chief,) or scattered o'er the plain?"
  To whom the spy: "Their powers they thus dispose
  The Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows,
  The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian host,
  And Leleges, encamp along the coast.
  Not distant far, lie higher on the land
  The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian band,
  And Phrygia's horse, by Thymbras' ancient wall;
  The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
  These Troy but lately to her succour won,
  Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus' son:
  I saw his coursers in proud triumph go,
  Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow;
  Rich silver plates his shining car infold;
  His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold;
  No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load,
  Celestial panoply, to grace a god!
  Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne,
  Or leave me here, a captive's fate to mourn,
  In cruel chains, till your return reveal
  The truth or falsehood of the news I tell."

  To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:
  "Think not to live, though all the truth be shown:
  Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife
  To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
  Or that again our camps thou may'st explore?
  No--once a traitor, thou betray'st no more."

  Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared
  With humble blandishment to stroke his beard,
  Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew,
  Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;
  One instant snatch'd his trembling soul to hell,
  The head, yet speaking, mutter'd as it fell.
  The furry helmet from his brow they tear,
  The wolf's grey hide, the unbended bow and spear;
  These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,
  To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize:

  "Great queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,
  And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil;
  Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise;
  O speed our labours, and direct our ways!"
  This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced,
  High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;
  Then heap'd with reeds and gathered boughs the plain,
  To guide their footsteps to the place again.

  Through the still night they cross the devious fields,
  Slippery with blood, o'er arms and heaps of shields,
  Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,
  And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
  Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band:
  The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
  Their arms in order on the ground reclined,
  Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:
  Amidst lay Rhesus, stretch'd in sleep profound,
  And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
  The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,
  And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
  "The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
  Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
  Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,
  Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie;
  Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,
  Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds."

  Pallas (this said) her hero's bosom warms,
  Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms;
  Where'er he pass'd, a purple stream pursued
  His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,
  Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore,
  And a low groan remurmur'd through the shore.
  So the grim lion, from his nightly den,
  O'erleaps the fences, and invades the pen,
  On sheep or goats, resistless in his way,
  He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey;
  Nor stopp'd the fury of his vengeful hand,
  Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
  Ulysses following, as his partner slew,
  Back by the foot each slaughter'd warrior drew;
  The milk-white coursers studious to convey
  Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way:
  Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred,
  Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
  Now twelve despatch'd, the monarch last they found;
  Tydides' falchion fix'd him to the ground.
  Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent,
  A warlike form appear'd before his tent,
  Whose visionary steel his bosom tore:
  So dream'd the monarch, and awaked no more.(218)

  Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,
  And leads them, fasten'd by the silver reins;
  These, with his bow unbent, he lash'd along;
  (The scourge forgot, on Rhesus' chariot hung;)
  Then gave his friend the signal to retire;
  But him, new dangers, new achievements fire;
  Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade
  To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
  Drag off the car where Rhesus' armour lay,
  Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
  While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands,
  Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:

  "Enough, my son; from further slaughter cease,
  Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;
  Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy,
  Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy."

  The voice divine confess'd the martial maid;
  In haste he mounted, and her word obey'd;
  The coursers fly before Ulysses' bow,
  Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.

  Not unobserved they pass'd: the god of light
  Had watch'd his Troy, and mark'd Minerva's flight,
  Saw Tydeus' son with heavenly succour bless'd,
  And vengeful anger fill'd his sacred breast.
  Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,
  And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;
  (On Rhesus' side accustom'd to attend,
  A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)
  He rose, and saw the field deform'd with blood,
  An empty space where late the coursers stood,
  The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast;
  For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
  Now while on Rhesus' name he calls in vain,
  The gathering tumult spreads o'er all the plain;
  On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
  And wondering view the slaughters of the night.

  Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade
  Where late the spoils of Hector's spy were laid,
  Ulysses stopp'd; to him Tydides bore
  The trophy, dropping yet with Dolon's gore:
  Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet
  The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet.

 [Illustration: DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.]

         DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.


  Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound,
  Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:
  "Methinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear,
  Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear;
  Perhaps some horses of the Trojan breed
  (So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed)
  The great Tydides and Ulysses bear,
  Return'd triumphant with this prize of war.
  Yet much I fear (ah, may that fear be vain!)
  The chiefs outnumber'd by the Trojan train;
  Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the shore;
  Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no more."

  Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear,
  And spring to earth; the Greeks dismiss their fear:
  With words of friendship and extended hands
  They greet the kings; and Nestor first demands:

  "Say thou, whose praises all our host proclaim,
  Thou living glory of the Grecian name!
  Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestow'd,
  The spoil of foes, or present of a god?
  Not those fair steeds, so radiant and so gay,
  That draw the burning chariot of the day.
  Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield,
  And daily mingle in the martial field;
  But sure till now no coursers struck my sight
  Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight.
  Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize,
  Bless'd as ye are, and favourites of the skies;
  The care of him who bids the thunder roar,
  And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore."

  "Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoin'd,)
  The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
  Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view,
  Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew;
  Sleeping he died, with all his guards around,
  And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.
  These other spoils from conquer'd Dolon came,
  A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame;
  By Hector sent our forces to explore,
  He now lies headless on the sandy shore."

  Then o'er the trench the bounding coursers flew;
  The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
  Straight to Tydides' high pavilion borne,
  The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn:
  The neighing coursers their new fellows greet,
  And the full racks are heap'd with generous wheat.
  But Dolon's armour, to his ships convey'd,
  High on the painted stern Ulysses laid,
  A trophy destin'd to the blue-eyed maid.

  Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain
  They cleanse their bodies in the neighb'ring main:
  Then in the polished bath, refresh'd from toil,
  Their joints they supple with dissolving oil,
  In due repast indulge the genial hour,
  And first to Pallas the libations pour:
  They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine,
  And the crown'd goblet foams with floods of wine.





BOOK XI.


ARGUMENT

THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON.

Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector
prepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva
give the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector is
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the
engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field. He
then makes a great slaughter of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put a stop
to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is obliged to
desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans, wounded, and in
the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him. Hector comes against
Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and rallies the Greeks. In
the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the army, is pierced with an
arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in Nestor's chariot. Achilles
(who overlooked the action from his ship) sent Patroclus to inquire which
of the Greeks was wounded in that manner; Nestor entertains him in his
tent with an account of the accidents of the day, and a long recital of
some former wars which he remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon
persuading Achilles to fight for his countrymen, or at least to permit him
to do it, clad in Achilles' armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets
Eurypylus also wounded, and assists him in that distress.

This book opens with the eight and-twentieth day of the poem, and the same
day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through the
twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and
part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the
monument of Ilus.

  The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,(219)
  Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' bed;
  With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
  When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's command,
  The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
  Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
  And, wrapt in tempests, o'er the fleet descends.
  High on Ulysses' bark her horrid stand
  She took, and thunder'd through the seas and land.

  Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
  Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound,
  Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng
  With horror sounds the loud Orthian song:
  The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms
  Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.
  No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
  But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

                 [Illustration: THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.]

                         THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.


  The king of men his hardy host inspires
  With loud command, with great example fires!
  Himself first rose, himself before the rest
  His mighty limbs in radiant armour dress'd,
  And first he cased his manly legs around
  In shining greaves with silver buckles bound;
  The beaming cuirass next adorn'd his breast,
  The same which once king Cinyras possess'd:
  (The fame of Greece and her assembled host
  Had reach'd that monarch on the Cyprian coast;
  'Twas then, the friendship of the chief to gain,
  This glorious gift he sent, nor sent in vain:)
  Ten rows of azure steel the work infold,
  Twice ten of tin, and twelve of ductile gold;
  Three glittering dragons to the gorget rise,
  Whose imitated scales against the skies
  Reflected various light, and arching bow'd,
  Like colour'd rainbows o'er a showery cloud
  (Jove's wondrous bow, of three celestial dies,
  Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies).
  A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
  Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
  Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased
  The shining blade, and golden hangers graced.
  His buckler's mighty orb was next display'd,
  That round the warrior cast a dreadful shade;
  Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround,
  And twice ten bosses the bright convex crown'd:
  Tremendous Gorgon frown'd upon its field,
  And circling terrors fill'd the expressive shield:
  Within its concave hung a silver thong,
  On which a mimic serpent creeps along,
  His azure length in easy waves extends,
  Till in three heads the embroider'd monster ends.
  Last o'er his brows his fourfold helm he placed,
  With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
  And in his hands two steely javelins wields,
  That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.

  That instant Juno, and the martial maid,
  In happy thunders promised Greece their aid;
  High o'er the chief they clash'd their arms in air,
  And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war.

  Close to the limits of the trench and mound,
  The fiery coursers to their chariots bound
  The squires restrain'd: the foot, with those who wield
  The lighter arms, rush forward to the field.
  To second these, in close array combined,
  The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
  Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun,
  As with the light the warriors' toils begun.
  Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distill'd
  Red drops of blood o'er all the fatal field;(220)
  The woes of men unwilling to survey,
  And all the slaughters that must stain the day.

  Near Ilus' tomb, in order ranged around,
  The Trojan lines possess'd the rising ground:
  There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
  Ãneas, honour'd as a guardian god;
  Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
  The brother-warriors of Antenor's line:
  With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face
  And fair proportion match'd the ethereal race.
  Great Hector, cover'd with his spacious shield,
  Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
  As the red star now shows his sanguine fires
  Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires,
  Thus through the ranks appear'd the godlike man,
  Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;
  While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies,
  Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
  As sweating reapers in some wealthy field,
  Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield,
  Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;
  Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet:
  So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,
  And falling ranks are strow'd on every side.
  None stoop'd a thought to base inglorious flight;(221)
  But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,
  Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey;
  Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
  Discord with joy the scene of death descries,
  And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes:
  Discord alone, of all the immortal train,
  Swells the red horrors of this direful plain:
  The gods in peace their golden mansions fill,
  Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:
  But general murmurs told their griefs above,
  And each accused the partial will of Jove.
  Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone,
  The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne,
  Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate;
  And fix'd, fulfill'd the just decrees of fate.
  On earth he turn'd his all-considering eyes,
  And mark'd the spot where Ilion's towers arise;
  The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread,
  The victor's rage, the dying, and the dead.

  Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's pure azure spread the glowing light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But now (what time in some sequester'd vale
  The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,
  When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear,
  And claim a respite from the sylvan war;
  But not till half the prostrate forests lay
  Stretch'd in long ruin, and exposed to day)
  Then, nor till then, the Greeks' impulsive might
  Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light.
  Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led,
  And slew Bienor at his people's head:
  Whose squire Oileus, with a sudden spring,
  Leap'd from the chariot to revenge his king;
  But in his front he felt the fatal wound,
  Which pierced his brain, and stretch'd him on the ground.
  Atrides spoil'd, and left them on the plain:
  Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain:
  Now soil'd with dust, and naked to the sky,
  Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.

  Two sons of Priam next to battle move,
  The product, one of marriage, one of love:(222)
  In the same car the brother-warriors ride;
  This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
  Far other task, than when they wont to keep,
  On Ida's tops, their father's fleecy sheep.
  These on the mountains once Achilles found,
  And captive led, with pliant osiers bound;
  Then to their sire for ample sums restored;
  But now to perish by Atrides' sword:
  Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:
  Cleft through the head his brother's fate succeeds,
  Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls,
  And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
  The Trojans see the youths untimely die,
  But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
  So when a lion ranging o'er the lawns.
  Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,
  Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws,
  And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws;
  The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,
  But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way;
  All drown'd in sweat, the panting mother flies,
  And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.

  Amidst the tumult of the routed train,
  The sons of false Antimachus were slain;
  He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold,
  And voted Helen's stay for Paris' gold.
  Atrides mark'd, as these their safety sought,
  And slew the children for the father's fault;
  Their headstrong horse unable to restrain,
  They shook with fear, and dropp'd the silken rein;
  Then in the chariot on their knees they fall,
  And thus with lifted hands for mercy call:

  "O spare our youth, and for the life we owe,
  Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow:
  Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,
  The Grecian ships his captive sons detain,
  Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,
  And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold."

  These words, attended with the flood of tears,
  The youths address'd to unrelenting ears:
  The vengeful monarch gave this stern reply:
  "If from Antimachus ye spring, ye die;
  The daring wretch who once in council stood
  To shed Ulysses' and my brother's blood,
  For proffer'd peace! and sues his seed for grace?
  No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race."

  This said, Pisander from the car he cast,
  And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last.
  His brother leap'd to earth; but, as he lay,
  The trenchant falchion lopp'd his hands away;
  His sever'd head was toss'd among the throng,
  And, rolling, drew a bloody train along.
  Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew;
  The king's example all his Greeks pursue.
  Now by the foot the flying foot were slain,
  Horse trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain.
  From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise,
  Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.
  The brass-hoof'd steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
  And the thick thunder beats the labouring ground,
  Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds;
  The distanced army wonders at his deeds,
  As when the winds with raging flames conspire,
  And o'er the forests roll the flood of fire,
  In blazing heaps the grove's old honours fall,
  And one refulgent ruin levels all:
  Before Atrides' rage so sinks the foe,
  Whole squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low.
  The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword,
  And many a car, now lighted of its lord,
  Wide o'er the field with guideless fury rolls,
  Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;
  While his keen falchion drinks the warriors' lives;
  More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!

  Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,
  But Jove and destiny prolong'd his date.
  Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood,
  Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.

  Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
  Through the mid field the routed urge their way:
  Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown,
  The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
  As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
  Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
  Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
  The hero halts, and his associates waits.
  Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
  Dispersed, disorder'd, fly the Trojan train.
  So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay'd
  The lion's roaring through the midnight shade;
  On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
  The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
  Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
  Still press'd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
  Hurl'd from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill'd,
  And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

  Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
  Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
  But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
  And down their summits pour'd a hundred rills:
  The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
  And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:

  "Iris, with haste thy golden wings display,
  To godlike Hector this our word convey--
  While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
  Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
  Bid him give way; but issue forth commands,
  And trust the war to less important hands:
  But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
  That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
  Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,
  Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
  Till to the main the burning sun descend,
  And sacred night her awful shade extend."

  He spoke, and Iris at his word obey'd;
  On wings of winds descends the various maid.
  The chief she found amidst the ranks of war,
  Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car.
  The goddess then: "O son of Priam, hear!
  From Jove I come, and his high mandate bear.
  While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
  Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
  Abstain from fight; yet issue forth commands,
  And trust the war to less important hands:
  But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
  The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
  Then Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast,
  Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
  Till to the main the burning sun descend,
  And sacred night her awful shade extend."

  She said, and vanish'd. Hector, with a bound,
  Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground,
  In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand
  A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band;
  Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
  And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
  They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare,
  Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.
  New force, new spirit, to each breast returns;
  The fight renew'd with fiercer fury burns:
  The king leads on: all fix on him their eye,
  And learn from him to conquer, or to die.

  Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell,
  Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
  The great Iphidamas, the bold and young,
  From sage Antenor and Theano sprung;
  Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred,
  And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.
  Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest,
  And early honour warm his generous breast,
  When the kind sire consign'd his daughter's charms
  (Theano's sister) to his youthful arms.
  But call'd by glory to the wars of Troy,
  He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy;
  From his loved bride departs with melting eyes,
  And swift to aid his dearer country flies.
  With twelve black ships he reach'd Percope's strand,
  Thence took the long laborious march by land.
  Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs,
  Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings.
  Atrides first discharged the missive spear;
  The Trojan stoop'd, the javelin pass'd in air.
  Then near the corslet, at the monarch's heart,
  With all his strength, the youth directs his dart:
  But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound,
  The point rebated, and repell'd the wound.
  Encumber'd with the dart, Atrides stands,
  Till, grasp'd with force, he wrench'd it from his hands;
  At once his weighty sword discharged a wound
  Full on his neck, that fell'd him to the ground.
  Stretch'd in the dust the unhappy warrior lies,
  And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
  Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain!
  Thy country's friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
  No more the youth shall join his consort's side,
  At once a virgin, and at once a bride!
  No more with presents her embraces meet,
  Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet,
  On whom his passion, lavish of his store,
  Bestow'd so much, and vainly promised more!
  Unwept, uncover'd, on the plain he lay,
  While the proud victor bore his arms away.

  Coon, Antenor's eldest hope, was nigh:
  Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye,
  While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view'd,
  And the pale features now deform'd with blood.
  Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took,
  Aim'd at the king, and near his elbow strook.
  The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part,
  And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
  Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear
  On Coon rushes with his lifted spear:
  His brother's corpse the pious Trojan draws,
  And calls his country to assert his cause;
  Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,
  And o'er the body spreads his ample shield.
  Atrides, marking an unguarded part,
  Transfix'd the warrior with his brazen dart;
  Prone on his brother's bleeding breast he lay,
  The monarch's falchion lopp'd his head away:
  The social shades the same dark journey go,
  And join each other in the realms below.

  The vengeful victor rages round the fields,
  With every weapon art or fury yields:
  By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
  Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o'erthrown.
  This, while yet warm distill'd the purple flood;
  But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood,
  Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,
  Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send:
  (The powers that cause the teeming matron's throes,
  Sad mothers of unutterable woes!)
  Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,
  He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;
  Then with a voice which fury made more strong,
  And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:

  "O friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won;
  Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:
  Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay,
  And envies half the glories of the day."

  He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong;
  The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
  Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,
  And from their sides the foam descends in snow;
  Shot through the battle in a moment's space,
  The wounded monarch at his tent they place.

  No sooner Hector saw the king retired,
  But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:
  "Hear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race!
  Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:
  Now call to mind your ancient trophies won,
  Your great forefathers' virtues, and your own.
  Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers!
  Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
  Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;
  And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds."

  With words like these the fiery chief alarms
  His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
  As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear
  The brindled lion, or the tusky bear:
  With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,
  And springs the foremost with his lifted dart:
  So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare;
  Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
  On the black body of the foe he pours;
  As from the cloud's deep bosom, swell'd with showers,
  A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps,
  Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.
  Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojan's glory crown'd,
  Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
  Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
  Opites next was added to their side;
  Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,
  Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night;
  Ãsymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;
  The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
  As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,
  Dispels the gather'd clouds that Notus forms:
  The gust continued, violent and strong,
  Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;
  Now to the skies the foaming billows rears,
  Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:
  Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands,
  O'erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.
  Now the last ruin the whole host appals;
  Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls;
  But wise Ulysses call'd Tydides forth,
  His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.
  "And stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
  Till Hector's arm involve the ships in flame?
  Haste, let us join, and combat side by side."
  The warrior thus, and thus the friend replied:

  "No martial toil I shun, no danger fear;
  Let Hector come; I wait his fury here.
  But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train:
  And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain."

  He sigh'd; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel,
  And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell:
  Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord,
  His death ennobled by Ulysses' sword.
  There slain, they left them in eternal night,
  Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.
  So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds,
  Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.
  Stern Hector's conquests in the middle plain
  Stood check'd awhile, and Greece respired again.

  The sons of Merops shone amidst the war;
  Towering they rode in one refulgent car:
  In deep prophetic arts their father skill'd,
  Had warn'd his children from the Trojan field.
  Fate urged them on: the father warn'd in vain;
  They rush'd to fight, and perish'd on the plain;
  Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms;
  The stern Tydides strips their shining arms.
  Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,
  And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize.
  Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight,
  And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.
  By Tydeus' lance Agastrophus was slain,
  The far-famed hero of Paeonian strain;
  Wing'd with his fears, on foot he strove to fly,
  His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh:
  Through broken orders, swifter than the wind,
  He fled, but flying left his life behind.
  This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes
  Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies;
  Shouts, as he pass'd, the crystal regions rend,
  And moving armies on his march attend.
  Great Diomed himself was seized with fear,
  And thus bespoke his brother of the war:

  "Mark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!
  The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field:
  Here stand his utmost force."--The warrior said;
  Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled;
  Nor miss'd its aim, but where the plumage danced
  Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
  Safe in his helm (the gift of Phoebus' hands)
  Without a wound the Trojan hero stands;
  But yet so stunn'd, that, staggering on the plain.
  His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain;
  O'er his dim sight the misty vapours rise,
  And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes.
  Tydides followed to regain his lance;
  While Hector rose, recover'd from the trance,
  Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd:
  The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud:
  "Once more thank Phoebus for thy forfeit breath,
  Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.
  Well by Apollo are thy prayers repaid,
  And oft that partial power has lent his aid.
  Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand,
  If any god assist Tydides' hand.
  Fly then, inglorious! but thy flight, this day,
  Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,"

  Him, while he triumph'd, Paris eyed from far,
  (The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of war;)
  Around the fields his feather'd shafts he sent,
  From ancient Ilus' ruin'd monument:
  Behind the column placed, he bent his bow,
  And wing'd an arrow at the unwary foe;
  Just as he stoop'd, Agastrophus's crest
  To seize, and drew the corslet from his breast,
  The bowstring twang'd; nor flew the shaft in vain,
  But pierced his foot, and nail'd it to the plain.
  The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring.
  Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.

  "He bleeds! (he cries) some god has sped my dart!
  Would the same god had fix'd it in his heart!
  So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand,
  Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand:
  Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear,
  As scatter'd lambs the rushing lion fear."

  He dauntless thus: "Thou conqueror of the fair,
  Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair;
  Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,
  Unskill'd in arms to act a manly part!
  Thou hast but done what boys or women can;
  Such hands may wound, but not incense a man.
  Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,
  A coward's weapon never hurts the brave.
  Not so this dart, which thou may'st one day feel;
  Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:
  Where this but lights, some noble life expires;
  Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires,
  Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,
  And leaves such objects as distract the fair."
  Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,
  Before him steps, and bending draws the dart:
  Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;
  Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds.

  Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,
  The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on;
  But stands collected in himself, and whole,
  And questions thus his own unconquer'd soul:

  "What further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
  What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
  What danger, singly if I stand the ground,
  My friends all scatter'd, all the foes around?
  Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice,
  The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
  To die or conquer, proves a hero's heart;
  And, knowing this, I know a soldier's part."

  Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast,
  Near, and more near, the shady cohorts press'd;
  These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;
  And round him deep the steely circle grows.
  So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds
  Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;
  He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire;
  His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;
  By these, by those, on every part is plied;
  And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
  Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
  Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;
  Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust,
  Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
  Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near;
  Ulysses reach'd him with the fatal spear;
  But to his aid his brother Socus flies,
  Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise.
  Near as he drew, the warrior thus began:

  "O great Ulysses! much-enduring man!
  Not deeper skill'd in every martial sleight,
  Than worn to toils, and active in the fight!
  This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace,
  And end at once the great Hippasian race,
  Or thou beneath this lance must press the field."
  He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield:
  Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown,
  Plough'd half his side, and bared it to the bone.
  By Pallas' care, the spear, though deep infix'd,
  Stopp'd short of life, nor with his entrails mix'd.

  The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
  Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew):
  "Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,
  Fate calls thee hence and finish'd is thy race.
  Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
  But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
  And add one spectre to the realms below!"

  He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
  Trembling gave way, and turn'd his back to flight;
  Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
  And held its passage through the panting heart:
  Wide in his breast appear'd the grisly wound;
  He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
  Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
  "Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
  There ends thy narrow span assign'd by fate,
  Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
  Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
  Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
  But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
  And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
  Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
  With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb."

  Then raging with intolerable smart,
  He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
  The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
  And gladden'd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
  Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
  Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
  Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
  The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:
  Alarm'd, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
  Who shares his labours, and defends his side:
  "O friend! Ulysses' shouts invade my ear;
  Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;
  Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all,
  Oppress'd by multitudes, the best may fall.
  Greece robb'd of him must bid her host despair,
  And feel a loss not ages can repair."

  Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends;
  Great Ajax, like the god of war, attends,
  The prudent chief in sore distress they found,
  With bands of furious Trojans compass'd round.(223)
  As when some huntsman, with a flying spear,
  From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer;
  Down his cleft side, while fresh the blood distils,
  He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills,
  Till life's warm vapour issuing through the wound,
  Wild mountain-wolves the fainting beast surround:
  Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade,
  The lion rushes through the woodland shade,
  The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;
  The lordly savage vindicates his prey.
  Ulysses thus, unconquer'd by his pains,
  A single warrior half a host sustains:
  But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield,
  The scattered crowds fly frighted o'er the field;
  Atrides' arm the sinking hero stays,
  And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.

  Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew;
  And first Doryclus, Priam's son, he slew,
  On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound,
  And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.
  As when a torrent, swell'd with wintry rains,
  Pours from the mountains o'er the deluged plains,
  And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn,
  A country's ruins! to the seas are borne:
  Fierce Ajax thus o'erwhelms the yielding throng;
  Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along.

  But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far,
  Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war:
  Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain,
  And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.
  There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
  The warrior's fury; there the battle glows;
  There fierce on foot, or from the chariot's height,
  His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
  The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around,
  Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:
  In his right shoulder the broad shaft appear'd,
  And trembling Greece for her physician fear'd.
  To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:
  "Glory of Greece, old Neleus' valiant son!
  Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,
  And great Machaon to the ships convey;
  A wise physician skill'd our wounds to heal,
  Is more than armies to the public weal."
  Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode
  The wounded offspring of the healing god.
  He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet
  Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.

  But now Cebriones, from Hector's car,
  Survey'd the various fortune of the war:
  "While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain,
  Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
  Before great Ajax see the mingled throng
  Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
  I know him well, distinguish'd o'er the field
  By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
  Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,
  There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds;
  There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,
  And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight."

  Thus having spoke, the driver's lash resounds;
  Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;
  Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields,
  O'er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
  The horses' hoofs are bathed in heroes' gore,
  And, dashing, purple all the car before;
  The groaning axle sable drops distils,
  And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
  Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,
  Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light:
  (By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone.
  The ranks he scatter'd and the troops o'erthrown:)
  Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate,
  And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.
  But partial Jove, espousing Hector's part,
  Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecian's heart;
  Confused, unnerved in Hector's presence grown,
  Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own.
  O'er his broad back his moony shield he threw,
  And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew.
  Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains,
  Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains;
  Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls,
  Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls,
  Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires;
  Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires:
  So turn'd stern Ajax, by whole hosts repell'd,
  While his swoln heart at every step rebell'd.

  As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued,
  In some wide field by troops of boys pursued,
  Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain,
  Crops the tall harvest, and lays waste the plain;
  Thick on his hide the hollow blows resound,
  The patient animal maintains his ground,
  Scarce from the field with all their efforts chased,
  And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last:
  On Ajax thus a weight of Trojans hung,
  The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung;
  Confiding now in bulky strength he stands,
  Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands;
  Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,
  And threats his followers with retorted eye.
  Fix'd as the bar between two warring powers,
  While hissing darts descend in iron showers:
  In his broad buckler many a weapon stood,
  Its surface bristled with a quivering wood;
  And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain,
  Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain.
  But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts,
  And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts;
  Whose eager javelin launch'd against the foe,
  Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow;
  From his torn liver the red current flow'd,
  And his slack knees desert their dying load.
  The victor rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Paris' bow a vengeful arrow fled;
  Fix'd in his nervous thigh the weapon stood,
  Fix'd was the point, but broken was the wood.
  Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired,
  Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:

  "What god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismay'd?
  Oh, turn to arms; 'tis Ajax claims your aid.
  This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,
  And this the last brave battle he shall wage:
  Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave
  The warrior rescue, and your country save."
  Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
  Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
  To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
  With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
  Each takes new courage at the hero's sight;
  The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

  Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
  While Nestor's chariot far from fight retires:
  His coursers steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gore,
  The Greeks' preserver, great Machaon, bore.
  That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
  Of his proud fleet, o'erlook'd the fields of fight;
  His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
  The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
  His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
  A transient pity touch'd his vengeful breast.
  Straight to Menoetius' much-loved son he sent:
  Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
  In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
  And fix'd the date of all his woes to come.

  "Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
  Whate'er thy will, Patroclus shall obey."

  "O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
  Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
  The time is come, when yon despairing host
  Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
  Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
  And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
  Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
  What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
  For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
  His form recall'd Machaon to my mind;
  Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face,
  The coursers pass'd me with so swift a pace."

  The hero said. His friend obey'd with haste,
  Through intermingled ships and tents he pass'd;
  The chiefs descending from their car he found:
  The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.
  The warriors standing on the breezy shore,
  To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore,
  Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale
  Convey'd that freshness the cool seas exhale;
  Then to consult on farther methods went,
  And took their seats beneath the shady tent.
  The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,
  Arsinous' daughter, graced with golden hairs:
  (Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave,
  Greece, as the prize of Nestor's wisdom gave:)
  A table first with azure feet she placed;
  Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced;
  Honey new-press'd, the sacred flour of wheat,
  And wholesome garlic, crown'd the savoury treat,
  Next her white hand an antique goblet brings,
  A goblet sacred to the Pylian kings
  From eldest times: emboss'd with studs of gold,
  Two feet support it, and four handles hold;
  On each bright handle, bending o'er the brink,
  In sculptured gold, two turtles seem to drink:
  A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,
  When the brisk nectar overlook'd the brim.
  Temper'd in this, the nymph of form divine
  Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine;
  With goat's-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows,
  And last with flour the smiling surface strows:
  This for the wounded prince the dame prepares:
  The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares:
  Salubrious draughts the warriors' thirst allay,
  And pleasing conference beguiles the day.

  Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent,
  Unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
  Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led
  To his high seat: the chief refused and said:

  "'Tis now no season for these kind delays;
  The great Achilles with impatience stays.
  To great Achilles this respect I owe;
  Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe,
  Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?
  With grief I see the great Machaon bleeds.
  This to report, my hasty course I bend;
  Thou know'st the fiery temper of my friend."
  "Can then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoin'd)
  Excite compassion in Achilles' mind?
  Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know?
  This is not half the story of our woe.
  Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone,
  Our bravest heroes in the navy groan,
  Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
  And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
  But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
  Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain:
  Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays,
  And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
  Chief after chief the raging foe destroys;
  Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
  Now the slow course of all-impairing time
  Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;
  Oh! had I still that strength my youth possess'd,
  When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppress'd,
  The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,
  And stretch'd the great Itymonaeus dead!
  Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,
  And ours was all the plunder of the plains:
  Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,
  As many goats, as many lowing kine:
  And thrice the number of unrivall'd steeds,
  All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
  These, as my first essay of arms, I won;
  Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
  Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored,
  And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
  The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair,
  When the proud Elians first commenced the war:
  For Neleus' sons Alcides' rage had slain;
  Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
  Oppress'd, we arm'd; and now this conquest gain'd,
  My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain'd.
  (That large reprisal he might justly claim,
  For prize defrauded, and insulted fame,
  When Elis' monarch, at the public course,
  Detain'd his chariot, and victorious horse.)
  The rest the people shared; myself survey'd
  The just partition, and due victims paid.
  Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,
  With many a courser, and with many a car;
  The sons of Actor at their army's head
  (Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
  High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,
  Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:
  Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow:
  The stream they pass'd, and pitch'd their tents below.
  Pallas, descending in the shades of night,
  Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.
  Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride,
  Myself the foremost; but my sire denied;
  Fear'd for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;
  And stopp'd my chariot, and detain'd my arms.
  My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled
  Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.

  "Along fair Arene's delightful plain
  Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main:
  There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,
  And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
  Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,
  To great Alphaeus' sacred source we came.
  There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid;
  An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;
  A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain
  To the blue monarch of the watery main.
  In arms we slept, beside the winding flood,
  While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.
  Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray,
  Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
  Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear;
  The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
  The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;
  King Augias' son, and spouse of Agamede:
  (She that all simples' healing virtues knew,
  And every herb that drinks the morning dew:)
  I seized his car, the van of battle led;
  The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
  The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill'd,
  Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field:
  Full fifty captive chariots graced my train;
  Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
  Then Actor's sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
  The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
  O'er heapy shields, and o'er the prostrate throng,
  Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along,
  Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,
  Where o'er the vales the Olenian rocks arose;
  Till Pallas stopp'd us where Alisium flows.
  Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay,
  And the same arm that led concludes the day;
  Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
  There to high Jove were public thanks assign'd,
  As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind.
  Such then I was, impell'd by youthful blood;
  So proved my valour for my country's good.

  "Achilles with unactive fury glows,
  And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.
  How shall he grieve, when to the eternal shade
  Her hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid!
  0 friend! my memory recalls the day,
  When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea,
  I, and Ulysses, touch'd at Phthia's port,
  And entered Peleus' hospitable court.
  A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice,
  And pour'd libations on the flaming thighs.
  Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire
  Menoetius, turn'd the fragments on the fire.
  Achilles sees us, to the feast invites;
  Social we sit, and share the genial rites.
  We then explained the cause on which we came,
  Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame.
  Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave;
  Peleus said only this:--'My son! be brave.'
  Menoetius thus: 'Though great Achilles shine
  In strength superior, and of race divine,
  Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend;
  Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.'
  Thus spoke your father at Thessalia's court:
  Words now forgot, though now of vast import.
  Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say:
  Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey;
  Some favouring god Achilles' heart may move;
  Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.
  If some dire oracle his breast alarm,
  If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm,
  Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
  If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line;
  Clad in Achilles' arms, if thou appear,
  Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from war;
  Press'd by fresh forces, her o'er-labour'd train
  Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again."

  This touch'd his generous heart, and from the tent
  Along the shore with hasty strides he went;
  Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand,
  The public mart and courts of justice stand,
  Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies,
  And altars to the guardian gods arise;
  There, sad, he met the brave Euaemon's son,
  Large painful drops from all his members run;
  An arrow's head yet rooted in his wound,
  The sable blood in circles mark'd the ground.
  As faintly reeling he confess'd the smart,
  Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
  Divine compassion touch'd Patroclus' breast,
  Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend address'd:

  "Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
  Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
  Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,
  Far from your friends, and from your native shore?
  Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
  Resists she yet the raging Hector's hand?
  Or are her heroes doom'd to die with shame,
  And this the period of our wars and fame?"

  Eurypylus replies: "No more, my friend;
  Greece is no more! this day her glories end;
  Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues,
  Her force increasing as her toil renews.
  Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet,
  Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
  But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,
  Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart;
  With lukewarm water wash the gore away;
  With healing balms the raging smart allay,
  Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,
  Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
  Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands
  This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands;
  And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,
  Now wants that succour which so oft he lent."

  To him the chief: "What then remains to do?
  The event of things the gods alone can view.
  Charged by Achilles' great command I fly,
  And bear with haste the Pylian king's reply:
  But thy distress this instant claims relief."
  He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
  The slaves their master's slow approach survey'd,
  And hides of oxen on the floor display'd:
  There stretch'd at length the wounded hero lay;
  Patroclus cut the forky steel away:
  Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised;
  The wound he wash'd, the styptic juice infused.
  The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow,
  The wound to torture, and the blood to flow.

                        [Illustration: HERCULES.]

                                HERCULES.





BOOK XII.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN WALL.

The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts to
force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas advises
to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. The Trojans follow
his counsel; and having divided their army into five bodies of foot, begin
the assault. But upon the signal of an eagle with a serpent in his talons,
which appeared on the left hand of the Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to
withdraw them again. This Hector opposes, and continues the attack; in
which, after many actions, Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall.
Hector also, casting a stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates,
and enters at the head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians
even to their ships.

  While thus the hero's pious cares attend
  The cure and safety of his wounded friend,
  Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage,
  And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
  Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose;
  With gods averse the ill-fated works arose;
  Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,
  The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.

  Without the gods, how short a period stands
  The proudest monument of mortal hands!
  This stood while Hector and Achilles raged.
  While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
  But when her sons were slain, her city burn'd,
  And what survived of Greece to Greece return'd;
  Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore,
  Then Ida's summits pour'd their watery store;
  Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills,
  Caresus roaring down the stony hills,
  Ãsepus, Granicus, with mingled force,
  And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;
  And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main(224)
  Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:
  These, turn'd by Phoebus from their wonted ways,
  Deluged the rampire nine continual days;
  The weight of waters saps the yielding wall,
  And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall.
  Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,
  And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
  The god of ocean, marching stern before,
  With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore,
  Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves,
  And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
  Now smooth'd with sand, and levell'd by the flood,
  No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;
  In their old bounds the rivers roll again,
  Shine 'twixt the hills, or wander o'er the plain.(225)

  But this the gods in later times perform;
  As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm;
  The strokes yet echoed of contending powers;
  War thunder'd at the gates, and blood distain'd the towers.
  Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay,
  Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay:
  Hector's approach in every wind they hear,
  And Hector's fury every moment fear.
  He, like a whirlwind, toss'd the scattering throng,
  Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.
  So 'midst the dogs and hunters' daring bands,
  Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands;
  Arm'd foes around a dreadful circle form,
  And hissing javelins rain an iron storm:
  His powers untamed, their bold assault defy,
  And where he turns the rout disperse or die:
  He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,
  And if he falls, his courage makes him fall.
  With equal rage encompass'd Hector glows;
  Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
  The panting steeds impatient fury breathe,
  And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;
  Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground,
  And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
  Eager they view'd the prospect dark and deep,
  Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep;
  The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)
  And bristled thick with sharpen'd stakes below.
  The foot alone this strong defence could force,
  And try the pass impervious to the horse.
  This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
  Restrain'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
  And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
  What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find,
  The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
  No pass through those, without a thousand wounds,
  No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
  Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown,
  On certain dangers we too rashly run:
  If 'tis will our haughty foes to tame,
  Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!
  Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall,
  And one great day destroy and bury all!
  But should they turn, and here oppress our train,
  What hopes, what methods of retreat remain?
  Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,
  In one promiscuous carnage crush'd and bruised,
  All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,
  Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
  Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed;
  Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;
  Then all alighting, wedged in firm array,
  Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
  So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power,
  And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour."

                [Illustration: POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.]

                        POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.


  This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung
  Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.
  The chief's example follow'd by his train,
  Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,
  By orders strict the charioteers enjoin'd
  Compel the coursers to their ranks behind.
  The forces part in five distinguish'd bands,
  And all obey their several chiefs' commands.
  The best and bravest in the first conspire,
  Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire:
  Great Hector glorious in the van of these,
  Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
  Before the next the graceful Paris shines,
  And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
  The sons of Priam with the third appear,
  Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer;
  In arms with these the mighty Asius stood,
  Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood,
  And whom Arisba's yellow coursers bore,
  The coursers fed on Selle's winding shore.
  Antenor's sons the fourth battalion guide,
  And great Ãneas, born on fountful Ide.
  Divine Sarpedon the last band obey'd,
  Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.
  Next him, the bravest, at their army's head,
  But he more brave than all the hosts he led.

  Now with compacted shields in close array,
  The moving legions speed their headlong way:
  Already in their hopes they fire the fleet,
  And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.

  While every Trojan thus, and every aid,
  The advice of wise Polydamas obey'd,
  Asius alone, confiding in his car,
  His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.
  Unhappy hero! and advised in vain;
  Those wheels returning ne'er shall mark the plain;
  No more those coursers with triumphant joy
  Restore their master to the gates of Troy!
  Black death attends behind the Grecian wall,
  And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
  Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain
  The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain;
  Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass'd,
  The gates half-open'd to receive the last.
  Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
  His following host with clamours rend the skies:
  To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
  Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

  To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
  Who from the Lapiths' warlike race descend;
  This Polypoetes, great Perithous' heir,
  And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
  As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
  Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
  Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown'd,
  Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
  High on the hills appears their stately form,
  And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
  So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
  Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
  Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
  And OEnomaus and Thoon close the rear:
  In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
  In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
  The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
  To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
  Even when they saw Troy's sable troops impend,
  And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
  Forth from the portals rush'd the intrepid pair,
  Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
  So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
  Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
  On every side the crackling trees they tear,
  And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
  They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
  Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
  Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
  With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
  Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
  Maintain'd the walls, and mann'd the lofty towers:
  To save their fleet their last efforts they try,
  And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.

  As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
  The dreary winter on his frozen wings;
  Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow
  Descend, and whiten all the fields below:
  So fast the darts on either army pour,
  So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower:
  Heavy, and thick, resound the batter'd shields,
  And the deaf echo rattles round the fields.

  With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven,
  The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven:
  "In powers immortal who shall now believe?
  Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive?
  What man could doubt but Troy's victorious power
  Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?
  But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive,
  To guard the entrance of their common hive,
  Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings
  They strike the assailants, and infix their stings;
  A race determined, that to death contend:
  So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend.
  Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates,
  Repel an army, and defraud the fates?"

  These empty accents mingled with the wind,
  Nor moved great Jove's unalterable mind;
  To godlike Hector and his matchless might
  Was owed the glory of the destined fight.
  Like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried,
  And all the gates sustain'd an equal tide;
  Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
  The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appear'd.
  The spirit of a god my breast inspire,
  To raise each act to life, and sing with fire!
  While Greece unconquer'd kept alive the war,
  Secure of death, confiding in despair;
  And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay,
  With unassisting arms deplored the day.

  Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain
  The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
  First Damasus, by Polypoetes' steel,
  Pierced through his helmet's brazen visor, fell;
  The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore!
  The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
  Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath:
  Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death;
  First through the belt Hippomachus he gored,
  Then sudden waved his unresisted sword:
  Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke,
  The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke:
  Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled;
  And round him rose a monument of dead.
  Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew,
  Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue;
  Fierce with impatience on the works to fall,
  And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.
  These on the farther bank now stood and gazed,
  By Heaven alarm'd, by prodigies amazed:
  A signal omen stopp'd the passing host,
  Their martial fury in their wonder lost.
  Jove's bird on sounding pinions beat the skies;
  A bleeding serpent of enormous size,
  His talons truss'd; alive, and curling round,
  He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound:
  Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,
  In airy circles wings his painful way,
  Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries:
  Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies.
  They, pale with terror, mark its spires unroll'd,
  And Jove's portent with beating hearts behold.
  Then first Polydamas the silence broke,
  Long weigh'd the signal, and to Hector spoke:

  "How oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear,
  For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?
  True to those counsels which I judge the best,
  I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.
  To speak his thoughts is every freeman's right,
  In peace, in war, in council, and in fight;
  And all I move, deferring to thy sway,
  But tends to raise that power which I obey.
  Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain!
  Seek not this day the Grecian ships to gain;
  For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent,
  And thus my mind explains its clear event:
  The victor eagle, whose sinister flight
  Retards our host, and fills our hearts with fright,
  Dismiss'd his conquest in the middle skies,
  Allow'd to seize, but not possess the prize;
  Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian fleet,
  Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet,
  Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed;
  More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed.
  So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise;
  For thus a skilful seer would read the skies."

  To him then Hector with disdain return'd:
  (Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burn'd:)
  "Are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
  Thy will is partial, not thy reason wrong:
  Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent,
  Sure heaven resumes the little sense it lent.
  What coward counsels would thy madness move
  Against the word, the will reveal'd of Jove?
  The leading sign, the irrevocable nod,
  And happy thunders of the favouring god,
  These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind
  By wandering birds that flit with every wind?
  Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend,
  Or where the suns arise, or where descend;
  To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
  While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
  Without a sign his sword the brave man draws,
  And asks no omen but his country's cause.
  But why should'st thou suspect the war's success?
  None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
  Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
  Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
  Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
  But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
  Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
  Spread their cold poison through our soldiers' breasts,
  My javelin can revenge so base a part,
  And free the soul that quivers in thy heart."

  Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall,
  Calls on his host; his host obey the call;
  With ardour follow where their leader flies:
  Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
  Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,
  And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide;
  He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,
  And gives great Hector the predestined day.
  Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,
  Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
  In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
  While these they undermine, and those they rend;
  Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall;
  And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
  Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms;
  The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms,
  Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;
  Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
  The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,
  And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power.
  The generous impulse every Greek obeys;
  Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.

  "Fellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame,
  And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
  Since not alike endued with force or art;
  Behold a day when each may act his part!
  A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
  To gain new glories, or augment the old.
  Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
  Drown Hector's vaunts in loud exhorts of fight;
  Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all;
  Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall;
  So Jove once more may drive their routed train,
  And Troy lie trembling in her walls again."

  Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers;
  And now the stones descend in heavier showers.
  As when high Jove his sharp artillery forms,
  And opes his cloudy magazine of storms;
  In winter's bleak un comfortable reign,
  A snowy inundation hides the plain;
  He stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep;
  Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep;
  And first the mountain-tops are cover'd o'er,
  Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
  Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,
  And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
  The circling seas, alone absorbing all,
  Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall:
  So from each side increased the stony rain,
  And the white ruin rises o'er the plain.

  Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend
  To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:
  Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
  Till great Sarpedon tower'd amid the field;
  For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame
  His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
  In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
  And bears aloft his ample shield in air;
  Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were roll'd,
  Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold:
  And while two pointed javelins arm his hands,
  Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands.

  So press'd with hunger, from the mountain's brow
  Descends a lion on the flocks below;
  So stalks the lordly savage o'er the plain,
  In sullen majesty, and stern disdain:
  In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,
  And shepherds gall him with an iron war;
  Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;
  He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.

  Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows
  With generous rage that drives him on the foes.
  He views the towers, and meditates their fall,
  To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall;
  Then casting on his friend an ardent look,
  Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke:

  "Why boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,(226)
  Where Xanthus' streams enrich the Lycian plain,
  Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field,
  And hills where vines their purple harvest yield,
  Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crown'd,
  Our feasts enhanced with music's sprightly sound?
  Why on those shores are we with joy survey'd,
  Admired as heroes, and as gods obey'd,
  Unless great acts superior merit prove,
  And vindicate the bounteous powers above?
  'Tis ours, the dignity they give to grace;
  The first in valour, as the first in place;
  That when with wondering eyes our martial bands
  Behold our deeds transcending our commands,
  Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state,
  Whom those that envy dare not imitate!
  Could all our care elude the gloomy grave,
  Which claims no less the fearful and the brave,
  For lust of fame I should not vainly dare
  In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
  But since, alas! ignoble age must come,
  Disease, and death's inexorable doom
  The life, which others pay, let us bestow,
  And give to fame what we to nature owe;
  Brave though we fall, and honour'd if we live,
  Or let us glory gain, or glory give!"

  He said; his words the listening chief inspire
  With equal warmth, and rouse the warrior's fire;
  The troops pursue their leaders with delight,
  Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.
  Menestheus from on high the storm beheld
  Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field:
  Around the walls he gazed, to view from far
  What aid appear'd to avert the approaching war,
  And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
  Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
  In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
  Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
  The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
  Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground
  Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
  And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
  Their strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
  Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
  The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
  And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
  Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
  "Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
  Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
  Your strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
  At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
  And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
  "Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
  And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
  To you I trust the fortune of the field,
  Till by this arm the foe shall be repell'd:
  That done, expect me to complete the day
  Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.
  With equal steps bold Teucer press'd the shore,
  Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

  High on the walls appear'd the Lycian powers,
  Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
  The Greeks, oppress'd, their utmost force unite,
  Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:
  The war renews, mix'd shouts and groans arise;
  Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
  Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades,
  And sends the brave Epicles to the shades,
  Sarpedon's friend. Across the warrior's way,
  Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay;
  In modern ages not the strongest swain
  Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain:
  He poised, and swung it round; then toss'd on high,
  It flew with force, and labour'd up the sky;
  Full on the Lycian's helmet thundering down,
  The ponderous ruin crush'd his batter'd crown.
  As skilful divers from some airy steep
  Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep,
  So falls Epicles; then in groans expires,
  And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.

  While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
  From Teucer's hand a winged arrow flew;
  The bearded shaft the destined passage found,
  And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
  The chief, who fear'd some foe's insulting boast
  Might stop the progress of his warlike host,
  Conceal'd the wound, and, leaping from his height
  Retired reluctant from the unfinish'd fight.
  Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld
  Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field;
  His beating breast with generous ardour glows,
  He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
  Alcmaon first was doom'd his force to feel;
  Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;
  Then from the yawning wound with fury tore
  The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Swift to the battlement the victor flies,
  Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies:
  It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;
  The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
  A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;
  And, like a deluge, rushes in the war.
  At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,
  And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe;
  Fix'd in his belt the feather'd weapon stood,
  And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
  But Jove was present in the dire debate,
  To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
  The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
  But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
  Then raised with hope, and fired with glory's charms,
  His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
  "O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
  Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
  The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
  Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
  Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
  The force of powerful union conquers all."

  This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
  They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
  Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
  And fix'd support the weight of all the war;
  Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
  Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
  As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
  Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
  They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
  One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
  Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
  Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
  Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
  Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
  The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
  And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

  As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
  From side to side the trembling balance nods,
  (While some laborious matron, just and poor,
  With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
  Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
  Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:(227)
  So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
  With fates prevailing, turn'd the scale of fight.
  Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
  And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
  "Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
  Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!"
  They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call,
  Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall:
  Around the works a wood of glittering spears
  Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
  A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:
  Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
  The snowy fleece, he toss'd, and shook in air;
  For Jove upheld, and lighten'd of its load
  The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
  Thus arm'd, before the folded gates he came,
  Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;
  With iron bars and brazen hinges strong,
  On lofty beams of solid timber hung:
  Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway,
  Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,
  The folds are shatter'd; from the crackling door
  Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
  Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
  Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:(228)
  A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living flame.
  He moves a god, resistless in his course,
  And seems a match for more than mortal force.
  Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
  A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
  The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
  The shore is heap'd with death, and tumult rends the sky.

                       [Illustration: GREEK ALTAR.]

                               GREEK ALTAR.





BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE ACTS
OF IDOMENEUS.

Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the station
of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires those heroes to
oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, encourages the other
Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The Ajaces form their troops in a
close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector and the Trojans. Several deeds of
valour are performed; Meriones, losing his spear in the encounter, repairs
to seek another at the tent of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation
between those two warriors, who return together to the battle. Idomeneus
signalizes his courage above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and
Alcathous: Deiphobus and Ãneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus
retires. Menelaus wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are
repulsed on the left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the
Ajaces, till, being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas
advises to call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes
first to rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax
again, and renews the attack.

The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the
Grecian wall and the sea-shore.

  When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast
  Had fix'd great Hector and his conquering host,
  He left them to the fates, in bloody fray
  To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
  Then turn'd to Thracia from the field of fight
  Those eyes that shed insufferable light,
  To where the Mysians prove their martial force,
  And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;
  And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays,
  Renown'd for justice and for length of days;(229)
  Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
  From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food:
  Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene
  Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men:
  No aid, he deems, to either host is given,
  While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven.

  Meantime the monarch of the watery main
  Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
  In Samothracia, on a mountain's brow,
  Whose waving woods o'erhung the deeps below,
  He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
  Where Ida's misty tops confusedly rise;
  Below, fair Ilion's glittering spires were seen;
  The crowded ships and sable seas between.
  There, from the crystal chambers of the main
  Emerged, he sat, and mourn'd his Argives slain.
  At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
  Prone down the rocky steep he rush'd along;
  Fierce as he pass'd, the lofty mountains nod,
  The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
  And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
  From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
  And, at the fourth, the distant Ãgae shook.

  Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
  Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
  This having reach'd, his brass-hoof'd steeds he reins,
  Fleet as the winds, and deck'd with golden manes.
  Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
  Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
  He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
  He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
  His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;
  The enormous monsters rolling o'er the deep
  Gambol around him on the watery way,
  And heavy whales in awkward measures play;
  The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,
  Exults, and owns the monarch of the main;
  The parting waves before his coursers fly;
  The wondering waters leave his axle dry.

  Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,
  Between where Tenedos the surges lave,
  And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:
  There the great ruler of the azure round
  Stopp'd his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,
  Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand,
  And link'd their fetlocks with a golden band,
  Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:
  The father of the floods pursues his way:
  Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,
  Or fiery deluge that devours the ground,
  The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,
  Embattled roll'd, as Hector rush'd along:
  To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry
  The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply:
  They vow destruction to the Grecian name,
  And in their hopes the fleets already flame.

  But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,
  The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground,
  Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen,
  Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;
  His shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
  But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.

               [Illustration: NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.]

                       NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.


  "'Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
  Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
  'Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
  Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
  On other works though Troy with fury fall,
  And pour her armies o'er our batter'd wall:
  There Greece has strength: but this, this part o'erthrown,
  Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
  Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
  Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
  If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
  Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
  Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
  And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

  Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
  Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
  Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
  Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
  Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
  Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
  Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
  Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
  The wide horizon shut him from their view.

  The inspiring god Oileus' active son
  Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

  "Some god, my friend, some god in human form
  Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
  Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
  Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
  I mark'd his parting, and the steps he trod;
  His own bright evidence reveals a god.
  Even now some energy divine I share,
  And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!"

  "With equal ardour (Telamon returns)
  My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
  New rising spirits all my force alarm,
  Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
  This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
  The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
  Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
  And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet."

  Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
  The heroes thus their mutual warmth express'd.
  Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
  Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
  Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
  And swarms victorious o'er their yielding walls:
  Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
  While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
  Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
  But breathe new courage as they feel the power.
  Teucer and Leitus first his words excite;
  Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;
  Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renown'd,
  And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;
  Last Nestor's son the same bold ardour takes,
  While thus the god the martial fire awakes:

  "Oh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace
  To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
  I trusted in the gods, and you, to see
  Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free:
  Ah, no--the glorious combat you disclaim,
  And one black day clouds all her former fame.
  Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,
  Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
  Fly we at length from Troy's oft-conquer'd bands?
  And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
  A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,
  Not born to glories of the dusty plain;
  Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
  A prey to every savage of the wood:
  Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
  Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
  A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
  The soldiers' baseness, or the general's fault?
  Fools! will ye perish for your leader's vice;
  The purchase infamy, and life the price?
  'Tis not your cause, Achilles' injured fame:
  Another's is the crime, but yours the shame.
  Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
  Must you be cowards, if your king's unjust?
  Prevent this evil, and your country save:
  Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
  Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
  I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
  But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
  My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
  Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
  A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
  Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath,
  On endless infamy, on instant death:
  For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore:
  Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
  Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;
  The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall."

  These words the Grecians' fainting hearts inspire,
  And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
  Fix'd at his post was each bold Ajax found,
  With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:
  So close their order, so disposed their fight,
  As Pallas' self might view with fix'd delight;
  Or had the god of war inclined his eyes,
  The god of war had own'd a just surprise.
  A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate,
  Descending Hector and his battle wait.
  An iron scene gleams dreadful o'er the fields,
  Armour in armour lock'd, and shields in shields,
  Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,
  Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
  The floating plumes unnumber'd wave above,
  As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove;
  And levell'd at the skies with pointing rays,
  Their brandish'd lances at each motion blaze.

  Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
  The close compacted legions urged their way:
  Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
  Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
  As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
  A rock's round fragment flies, with fury borne,
  (Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
  Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
  From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
  At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
  Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain,
  Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
  There stops--so Hector. Their whole force he proved,(230)
  Resistless when he raged, and, when he stopp'd, unmoved.

  On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,
  And all their falchions wave around his head:
  Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires;
  But with repeated shouts his army fires.
  "Trojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way
  Through yon square body, and that black array:
  Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power,
  Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower;
  For he that Juno's heavenly bosom warms,
  The first of gods, this day inspires our arms."

  He said; and roused the soul in every breast:
  Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest,
  Forth march'd Deiphobus; but, marching, held
  Before his wary steps his ample shield.
  Bold Merion aim'd a stroke (nor aim'd it wide);
  The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;
  But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand,
  The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
  The Trojan warrior, touch'd with timely fear,
  On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
  The Greek, retreating, mourn'd his frustrate blow,
  And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe;
  Then to the ships with surly speed he went,
  To seek a surer javelin in his tent.

  Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows,
  The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
  By Teucer's arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
  The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
  Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led,
  In fair Pedaeus' verdant pastures bred,
  The youth had dwelt, remote from war's alarms,
  And blest in bright Medesicaste's arms:
  (This nymph, the fruit of Priam's ravish'd joy,
  Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:)
  To Troy, when glory call'd his arms, he came,
  And match'd the bravest of her chiefs in fame:
  With Priam's sons, a guardian of the throne,
  He lived, beloved and honour'd as his own.
  Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
  He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
  As from some far-seen mountain's airy crown,
  Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
  And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
  So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
  Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Hector's hand a shining javelin fled:
  He saw, and shunn'd the death; the forceful dart
  Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus's heart,
  Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
  Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
  Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
  To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
  And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
  When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
  Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
  He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
  Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
  Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
  The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
  Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
  (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
  Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
  Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
  As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
  Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
  In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
  And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
  So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
  Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
  Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
  At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

  The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
  And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
  Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
  And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
  Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
  He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
  His pensive brow the generous care express'd
  With which a wounded soldier touch'd his breast,
  Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
  And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
  Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
  That office paid, he issued from his tent
  Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
  In Thoas' voice, Andraemon's valiant son,
  Who ruled where Calydon's white rocks arise,
  And Pleuron's chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

  "Where's now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
  Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?"

  To whom the king: "On Greece no blame be thrown;
  Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.
  Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains
  Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:
  'Tis heaven, alas! and Jove's all-powerful doom,
  That far, far distant from our native home
  Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!
  Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend
  Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best,
  And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest."

  Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Ah! never may he see his native land,
  But feed the vultures on this hateful strand,
  Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,
  Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
  For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,
  And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
  Together let us battle on the plain;
  Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain:
  Not vain the weakest, if their force unite;
  But ours, the bravest have confess'd in fight."

  This said, he rushes where the combat burns;
  Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:
  From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand,
  And clad in arms that lighten'd all the strand,
  Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,
  Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove,
  Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,
  Or terrifies the offending world with wars;
  In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,
  From pole to pole the trail of glory flies:
  Thus his bright armour o'er the dazzled throng
  Gleam'd dreadful, as the monarch flash'd along.

  Him, near his tent, Meriones attends;
  Whom thus he questions: "Ever best of friends!
  O say, in every art of battle skill'd,
  What holds thy courage from so brave a field?
  On some important message art thou bound,
  Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
  Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,
  And glows with prospects of th' approaching day."

  "O prince! (Meriones replies) whose care
  Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war;
  This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
  The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield."

  To whom the Cretan: "Enter, and receive
  The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
  Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
  That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
  Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
  Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
  Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
  And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
  Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll'd,
  And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold."

  "Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
  We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
  But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
  I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
  What need I more? If any Greek there be
  Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee."

  To this, Idomeneus: "The fields of fight
  Have proved thy valour, and unconquer'd might:
  And were some ambush for the foes design'd,
  Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
  In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
  The fear of each, or valour, stands confess'd.
  No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
  He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
  A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
  Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
  Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
  With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
  And looks a bloodless image of despair!
  Not so the brave--still dauntless, still the same,
  Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
  Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
  And fix'd his soul, to conquer or to die:
  If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
  'Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.

  "In such assays thy blameless worth is known,
  And every art of dangerous war thy own.
  By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
  Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
  Such as may teach, 'twas still thy brave delight
  T'oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
  But why, like infants, cold to honour's charms,
  Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms?
  Go--from my conquer'd spears the choicest take,
  And to their owners send them nobly back."

  Swift at the word bold Merion snatch'd a spear
  And, breathing slaughter, follow'd to the war.
  So Mars armipotent invades the plain,
  (The wide destroyer of the race of man,)
  Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course,
  Arm'd with stern boldness, and enormous force;
  The pride of haughty warriors to confound,
  And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:
  From Thrace they fly, call'd to the dire alarms
  Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms;
  Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,
  To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those.
  So march'd the leaders of the Cretan train,
  And their bright arms shot horror o'er the plain.

  Then first spake Merion: "Shall we join the right,
  Or combat in the centre of the fight?
  Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
  Hazard and fame all parts alike attend."

  "Not in the centre (Idomen replied:)
  Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide;
  Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,
  And gallant Teucer deals destruction there,
  Skill'd or with shafts to gall the distant field,
  Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
  These can the rage of haughty Hector tame:
  Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,
  Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed,
  And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
  Great must he be, of more than human birth,
  Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth.
  Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,
  Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
  In standing fight he mates Achilles' force,
  Excell'd alone in swiftness in the course.
  Then to the left our ready arms apply,
  And live with glory, or with glory die."

  He said: and Merion to th' appointed place,
  Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
  Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld
  Rush like a fiery torrent o'er the field,
  Their force embodied in a tide they pour;
  The rising combat sounds along the shore.
  As warring winds, in Sirius' sultry reign,
  From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;
  On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise,
  And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:
  Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
  Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken'd heaven.
  All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
  Bristled with upright spears, that flash'd afar;
  Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
  And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
  Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

  Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
  And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
  The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
  Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
  But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
  While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
  Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
  And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
  Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
  Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
  But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
  And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
  For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
  Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
  These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
  In war and discord's adamantine chain,
  Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
  Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

  Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
  The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
  First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
  Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
  From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
  Cassandra's love he sought, with boasts of power,
  And promised conquest was the proffer'd dower.
  The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
  The king consented, but the fates refused.
  Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
  The field he measured with a larger stride.
  Him as he stalk'd, the Cretan javelin found;
  Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
  His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
  His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
  The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
  "And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
  Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
  And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
  Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;
  For such an aid what will not Argos give?
  To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join,
  And count Atrides' fairest daughter thine.
  Meantime, on further methods to advise,
  Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;
  There hear what Greece has on her part to say."
  He spoke, and dragg'd the gory corse away.
  This Asius view'd, unable to contain,
  Before his chariot warring on the plain:
  (His crowded coursers, to his squire consign'd,
  Impatient panted on his neck behind:)
  To vengeance rising with a sudden spring,
  He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
  The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near,
  Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:
  Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide,
  And glitter'd, extant at the further side.
  As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral,
  Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
  Then spreads a length of ruin o'er the ground:
  So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,
  And stretch'd before his much-loved coursers lay.
  He grinds the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
  And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
  Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear,
  Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,
  Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away,
  But falls transfix'd, an unresisting prey:
  Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
  The stately car, and labours out his breath.
  Thus Asius' steeds (their mighty master gone)
  Remain the prize of Nestor's youthful son.

  Stabb'd at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
  And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
  The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance
  From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
  Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,
  Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,
  On his raised arm by two strong braces stay'd,)
  He lay collected in defensive shade.
  O'er his safe head the javelin idly sung,
  And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
  Even then the spear the vigorous arm confess'd,
  And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor's breast:
  Warm'd in his liver, to the ground it bore
  The chief, his people's guardian now no more!

  "Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
  Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
  For thee, through hell's black portals stand display'd,
  This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade."

  Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
  Touch'd every Greek, but Nestor's son the most.
  Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
  And his broad buckler shields his slaughter'd friend:
  Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
  His honour'd body to the tented shore.

  Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
  Resolved to perish in his country's cause,
  Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
  To wail his fate in death's eternal gloom.
  He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
  Great Ãsyetes was the hero's sire;
  His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
  Anchises' eldest hope, and darling care:
  Who charm'd her parents' and her husband's heart
  With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
  He once of Ilion's youth the loveliest boy,
  The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
  By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
  Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
  And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
  Fix'd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
  While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
  Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
  Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
  The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
  His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,
  The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;
  Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay,
  Life's purple tide impetuous gush'd away.

  Then Idomen, insulting o'er the slain:
  "Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:
  See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend;
  This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
  Approaching now thy boasted might approve,
  And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
  From Jove, enamour'd of a mortal dame,
  Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:
  Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minos' heir;
  His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:
  O'er spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,
  And thence my ships transport me through the main:
  Lord of a host, o'er all my host I shine,
  A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line."

  The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,
  Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete,
  Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed
  To call some hero to partake the deed,
  Forthwith Ãneas rises to his thought:
  For him in Troy's remotest lines he sought,
  Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
  And sees superior posts in meaner hands.
  To him, ambitious of so great an aid,
  The bold Deiphobus approach'd, and said:

  "Now, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms,
  If e'er thy bosom felt fair honour's charms.
  Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend;
  Come, and the warrior's loved remains defend.
  Beneath his cares thy early youth was train'd,
  One table fed you, and one roof contain'd.
  This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
  Haste, and revenge it on th' insulting foe."

  Ãneas heard, and for a space resign'd
  To tender pity all his manly mind;
  Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight:
  The Greek awaits him with collected might.
  As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
  Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
  When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
  Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
  O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
  Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
  So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
  And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
  Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
  The youthful offspring of the god of war,
  Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
  To these the warrior sent his voice around.
  "Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
  Lo, great Ãneas rushes to the fight:
  Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
  He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
  Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
  The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

  He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
  Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
  Around the chief. Ãneas too demands
  Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
  In order follow all th' embodied train,
  Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
  Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
  Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
  With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
  To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
  So joys Ãneas, as his native band
  Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

  Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
  On every side the steely circle grows;
  Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
  And o'er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
  Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
  There great Idomeneus, Ãneas here.
  Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
  And burn'd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
  The Trojan weapon whizz'd along in air;
  The Cretan saw, and shunn'd the brazen spear:
  Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood
  Stuck deep in earth, and quiver'd where it stood.
  But OEnomas received the Cretan's stroke;
  The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,
  It ripp'd his belly with a ghastly wound,
  And roll'd the smoking entrails on the ground.
  Stretch'd on the plain, he sobs away his breath,
  And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.
  The victor from his breast the weapon tears;
  His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears.
  Though now unfit an active war to wage,
  Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age,
  His listless limbs unable for the course,
  In standing fight he yet maintains his force;
  Till faint with labour, and by foes repell'd,
  His tired slow steps he drags from off the field.
  Deiphobus beheld him as he pass'd,
  And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast:
  The javelin err'd, but held its course along,
  And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:
  The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground,
  And gnash'd the dust, all bloody with his wound.

  Nor knew the furious father of his fall;
  High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall,
  On golden clouds th' immortal synod sate;
  Detain'd from bloody war by Jove and Fate.

  Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay,
  For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray,
  Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies,
  And from his temples rends the glittering prize;
  Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,
  And on his loaded arm discharged his spear:
  He drops the weight, disabled with the pain;
  The hollow helmet rings against the plain.
  Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey,
  From his torn arm the Grecian rent away
  The reeking javelin, and rejoin'd his friends.
  His wounded brother good Polites tends;
  Around his waist his pious arms he threw,
  And from the rage of battle gently drew:
  Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car,
  Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war;
  To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore,
  And sprinkling, as he pass'd, the sands with gore.

  Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground,
  Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound.
  Bold Aphareus by great Ãneas bled;
  As toward the chief he turn'd his daring head,
  He pierced his throat; the bending head, depress'd
  Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast;
  His shield reversed o'er the fallen warrior lies,
  And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.
  Antilochus, as Thoon turn'd him round,
  Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound:
  The hollow vein, that to the neck extends
  Along the chine, his eager javelin rends:
  Supine he falls, and to his social train
  Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.
  Th' exulting victor, leaping where he lay,
  From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away;
  His time observed; for closed by foes around,
  On all sides thick the peals of arms resound.
  His shield emboss'd the ringing storm sustains,
  But he impervious and untouch'd remains.
  (Great Neptune's care preserved from hostile rage
  This youth, the joy of Nestor's glorious age.)
  In arms intrepid, with the first he fought,
  Faced every foe, and every danger sought;
  His winged lance, resistless as the wind,
  Obeys each motion of the master's mind!
  Restless it flies, impatient to be free,
  And meditates the distant enemy.
  The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,
  And struck his target with the brazen spear
  Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow,
  And blunts the javelin of th' eluded foe:
  In the broad buckler half the weapon stood,
  Splinter'd on earth flew half the broken wood.
  Disarm'd, he mingled in the Trojan crew;
  But Merion's spear o'ertook him as he flew,
  Deep in the belly's rim an entrance found,
  Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound.
  Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,
  Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied,
  While death's strong pangs distend his labouring side,
  His bulk enormous on the field displays;
  His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
  The spear the conqueror from his body drew,
  And death's dim shadows swarm before his view.
  Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:
  King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade,
  And smote his temples with an arm so strong,
  The helm fell off, and roll'd amid the throng:
  There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;
  For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
  Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
  And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
  That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw;
  And this stood adverse with the bended bow:
  Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell,
  But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
  As on some ample barn's well harden'd floor,
  (The winds collected at each open door,)
  While the broad fan with force is whirl'd around,
  Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
  So from the steel that guards Atrides' heart,
  Repell'd to distance flies the bounding dart.
  Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,
  Pierced with his lance the hand that grasp'd the bow.
  And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand
  Trail'd the long lance that mark'd with blood the sand:
  But good Agenor gently from the wound
  The spear solicits, and the bandage bound;
  A sling's soft wool, snatch'd from a soldier's side,
  At once the tent and ligature supplied.

  Behold! Pisander, urged by fate's decree,
  Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
  Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:
  High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
  First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;
  The lance far distant by the winds was blown.
  Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides' shield:
  Pisander's spear fell shiver'd on the field.
  Not so discouraged, to the future blind,
  Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind;
  Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord
  Like lightning brandish'd his far beaming sword.
  His left arm high opposed the shining shield:
  His right beneath, the cover'd pole-axe held;
  (An olive's cloudy grain the handle made,
  Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;)
  This on the helm discharged a noble blow;
  The plume dropp'd nodding to the plain below,
  Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel:
  Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell;
  The crashing bones before its force gave way;
  In dust and blood the groaning hero lay:
  Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore,
  The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.
  And fierce Atrides spurn'd him as he bled,
  Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:

  "Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
  O race perfidious, who delight in war!
  Already noble deeds ye have perform'd;
  A princess raped transcends a navy storm'd:
  In such bold feats your impious might approve,
  Without th' assistance, or the fear of Jove.
  The violated rites, the ravish'd dame;
  Our heroes slaughter'd and our ships on flame,
  Crimes heap'd on crimes, shall bend your glory down,
  And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
  O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies,
  Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
  If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow,
  From whence this favour to an impious foe?
  A godless crew, abandon'd and unjust,
  Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
  The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy;
  Sleep's balmy blessing, love's endearing joy;
  The feast, the dance; whate'er mankind desire,
  Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
  But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight
  In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight."

  This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)
  The bloody armour, which his train received:
  Then sudden mix'd among the warring crew,
  And the bold son of Pylaemenes slew.
  Harpalion had through Asia travell'd far,
  Following his martial father to the war:
  Through filial love he left his native shore,
  Never, ah, never to behold it more!
  His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling
  Against the target of the Spartan king;
  Thus of his lance disarm'd, from death he flies,
  And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
  Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled,
  The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Beneath the bone the glancing point descends,
  And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:
  Sunk in his sad companions' arms he lay,
  And in short pantings sobb'd his soul away;
  (Like some vile worm extended on the ground;)
  While life's red torrent gush'd from out the wound.

  Him on his car the Paphlagonian train
  In slow procession bore from off the plain.
  The pensive father, father now no more!
  Attends the mournful pomp along the shore;
  And unavailing tears profusely shed;
  And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead.

  Paris from far the moving sight beheld,
  With pity soften'd and with fury swell'd:
  His honour'd host, a youth of matchless grace,
  And loved of all the Paphlagonian race!
  With his full strength he bent his angry bow,
  And wing'd the feather'd vengeance at the foe.
  A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named,
  For riches much, and more for virtue famed.
  Who held his seat in Corinth's stately town;
  Polydus' son, a seer of old renown.
  Oft had the father told his early doom,
  By arms abroad, or slow disease at home:
  He climb'd his vessel, prodigal of breath,
  And chose the certain glorious path to death.
  Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went;
  The soul came issuing at the narrow vent:
  His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground,
  And everlasting darkness shades him round.

  Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield,
  (Wrapp'd in the cloud and tumult of the field:)
  Wide on the left the force of Greece commands,
  And conquest hovers o'er th' Achaian bands;
  With such a tide superior virtue sway'd,
  And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid.
  But in the centre Hector fix'd remain'd,
  Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gain'd;
  There, on the margin of the hoary deep,
  (Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.
  And where low walls confine the beating tides,
  Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides;
  Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged,
  And all the thunder of the battle raged,)
  There join'd, the whole Boeotian strength remains,
  The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains,
  Locrians and Phthians, and th' Epaean force;
  But join'd, repel not Hector's fiery course.
  The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led;
  Bias and great Menestheus at their head:
  Meges the strong the Epaean bands controll'd,
  And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:
  The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might,
  And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
  This drew from Phylacus his noble line;
  Iphiclus' son: and that (Oileus) thine:
  (Young Ajax' brother, by a stolen embrace;
  He dwelt far distant from his native place,
  By his fierce step-dame from his father's reign
  Expell'd and exiled for her brother slain:)
  These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ,
  Mix'd with Boeotians, on the shores of Troy.

  Now side by side, with like unwearied care,
  Each Ajax laboured through the field of war:
  So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil,
  Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil,
  Join'd to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear,
  And trace large furrows with the shining share;
  O'er their huge limbs the foam descends in snow,
  And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow.
  A train of heroes followed through the field,
  Who bore by turns great Ajax' sevenfold shield;
  Whene'er he breathed, remissive of his might,
  Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
  No following troops his brave associate grace:
  In close engagement an unpractised race,
  The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield,
  Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;
  But skill'd from far the flying shaft to wing,
  Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,
  Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound,
  Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
  Thus in the van the Telamonian train,
  Throng'd in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain:
  Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,
  Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky,
  The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;
  Troy's scattering orders open to the shower.

  Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,
  And the gall'd Ilians to their walls retired;
  But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
  Address'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "Though great in all, thou seem'st averse to lend
  Impartial audience to a faithful friend;
  To gods and men thy matchless worth is known,
  And every art of glorious war thy own;
  But in cool thought and counsel to excel,
  How widely differs this from warring well!
  Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
  Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
  To some the powers of bloody war belong,
  To some sweet music and the charm of song;
  To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign'd
  A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
  Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
  And towns and empires for their safety bless.
  If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
  Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
  See, as thou mov'st, on dangers dangers spread,
  And war's whole fury burns around thy head.
  Behold! distress'd within yon hostile wall,
  How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
  What troops, out-number'd, scarce the war maintain!
  And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
  Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings
  Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things.
  Whether (the gods succeeding our desires)
  To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires;
  Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away,
  Contented with the conquest of the day.
  I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone,
  Pay the large debt of last revolving sun;
  Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
  On yonder decks, and yet o'erlooks the plains!"

  The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound,
  Leap'd from his chariot on the trembling ground;
  Swift as he leap'd his clanging arms resound.
  "To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,
  And here detain the scatter'd youth of Troy;
  Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,
  And hasten back to end the doubtful day."

  This said, the towering chief prepares to go,
  Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,
  And seems a moving mountain topp'd with snow.
  Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,
  And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
  To Panthus' son, at Hector's high command
  Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band:
  But round the battlements, and round the plain,
  For many a chief he look'd, but look'd in vain;
  Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,
  Nor Asius' son, nor Asius' self appear:
  For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound,
  Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;
  Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay;
  High on the wall some breathed their souls away.

  Far on the left, amid the throng he found
  (Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around)
  The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,
  Opprobrious thus, th' impatient chief reproved:

  "Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind,
  As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
  Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
  The godlike father, and th' intrepid son?
  The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;
  And great Othryoneus, so fear'd of late?
  Black fate hang's o'er thee from th' avenging gods,
  Imperial Troy from her foundations nods;
  Whelm'd in thy country's ruin shalt thou fall,
  And one devouring vengeance swallow all."

  When Paris thus: "My brother and my friend,
  Thy warm impatience makes thy tongue offend,
  In other battles I deserved thy blame,
  Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame:
  But since yon rampart by thy arms lay low,
  I scatter'd slaughter from my fatal bow.
  The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain;
  Of all those heroes, two alone remain;
  Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer,
  Each now disabled by a hostile spear.
  Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires:
  This heart and hand shall second all thy fires:
  What with this arm I can, prepare to know,
  Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.
  But 'tis not ours, with forces not our own
  To combat: strength is of the gods alone."
  These words the hero's angry mind assuage:
  Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
  Around Polydamas, distain'd with blood,
  Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood,
  Palmus, with Polypoetes the divine,
  And two bold brothers of Hippotion's line
  (Who reach'd fair Ilion, from Ascania far,
  The former day; the next engaged in war).
  As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs,
  That bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful wings,
  Wide o'er the blasted fields the tempest sweeps;
  Then, gather'd, settles on the hoary deeps;
  The afflicted deeps tumultuous mix and roar;
  The waves behind impel the waves before,
  Wide rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore:
  Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng,
  Chief urged on chief, and man drove man along.
  Far o'er the plains, in dreadful order bright,
  The brazen arms reflect a beamy light:
  Full in the blazing van great Hector shined,
  Like Mars commission'd to confound mankind.
  Before him flaming his enormous shield,
  Like the broad sun, illumined all the field;
  His nodding helm emits a streamy ray;
  His piercing eyes through all the battle stray,
  And, while beneath his targe he flash'd along,
  Shot terrors round, that wither'd e'en the strong.

  Thus stalk'd he, dreadful; death was in his look:
  Whole nations fear'd; but not an Argive shook.
  The towering Ajax, with an ample stride,
  Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied:

  "Hector! come on; thy empty threats forbear;
  'Tis not thy arm, 'tis thundering Jove we fear:
  The skill of war to us not idly given,
  Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven.
  Vain are the hopes that haughty mind imparts,
  To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and hearts.
  Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall,
  Your boasted city, and your god-built wall,
  Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground;
  And spread a long unmeasured ruin round.
  The time shall come, when, chased along the plain,
  Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain;
  Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course,
  The wings of falcons for thy flying horse;
  Shalt run, forgetful of a warrior's fame,
  While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame."

  As thus he spoke, behold, in open view,
  On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
  To Jove's glad omen all the Grecians rise,
  And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies:
  Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side;
  They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied:

  "From whence this menace, this insulting strain?
  Enormous boaster! doom'd to vaunt in vain.
  So may the gods on Hector life bestow,
  (Not that short life which mortals lead below,
  But such as those of Jove's high lineage born,
  The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)
  As this decisive day shall end the fame
  Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
  And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait
  The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:
  That giant-corse, extended on the shore,
  Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore."

  He said; and like a lion stalk'd along:
  With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,
  Sent from his following host: the Grecian train
  With answering thunders fill'd the echoing plain;
  A shout that tore heaven's concave, and, above,
  Shook the fix'd splendours of the throne of Jove.

                     [Illustration: GREEK EARRINGS.]

                             GREEK EARRINGS.





BOOK XIV.


ARGUMENT.(231)

JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.

Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the increasing
clamour of war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he meets that prince
with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the extremity of the danger.
Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by night, which Ulysses
withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, wounded as they were,
they should go forth and encourage the army with their presence, which
advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of Jupiter to the Trojans,
forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off her charms with the utmost
care, and (the more surely to enchant him) obtains the magic girdle of
Venus. She then applies herself to the god of sleep, and, with some
difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of Jupiter: this done, she goes
to mount Ida, where the god, at first sight, is ravished with her beauty,
sinks in her embraces, and is laid asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his
slumber, and succours the Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a
prodigious stone by Ajax, and carried off from the battle: several actions
succeed, till the Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the
lesser Ajax signalizes himself in a particular manner.

  But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,
  Could charm the cares of Nestor's watchful soul;
  His startled ears the increasing cries attend;
  Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:

  "What new alarm, divine Machaon, say,
  What mix'd events attend this mighty day?
  Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
  And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!
  Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care,
  Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare,
  Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;
  While I the adventures of the day explore."

  He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes' shield,
  (His valiant offspring,) hasten'd to the field;
  (That day the son his father's buckler bore;)
  Then snatch'd a lance, and issued from the door.
  Soon as the prospect open'd to his view,
  His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;
  Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight,
  The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
  As when old ocean's silent surface sleeps,
  The waves just heaving on the purple deeps:
  While yet the expected tempest hangs on high,
  Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky,
  The mass of waters will no wind obey;
  Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
  While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,
  Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage,
  To join the host, or to the general haste;
  Debating long, he fixes on the last:
  Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,
  The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms,
  The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly;
  Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.

  Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet,
  By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:
  The king of men, Ulysses the divine,
  And who to Tydeus owes his noble line.(232)
  (Their ships at distance from the battle stand,
  In lines advanced along the shelving strand:
  Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain
  At length; beside the margin of the main,
  Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor:
  Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.)
  Supported on the spears, they took their way,
  Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day.
  Nestor's approach alarm'd each Grecian breast,
  Whom thus the general of the host address'd:

  "O grace and glory of the Achaian name;
  What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
  Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfill'd,
  Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes kill'd?
  Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good,
  On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.
  Is every heart inflamed with equal rage
  Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
  And have I lived to see with mournful eyes
  In every Greek a new Achilles rise?"

  Gerenian Nestor then: "So fate has will'd;
  And all-confirming time has fate fulfill'd.
  Not he that thunders from the aerial bower,
  Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
  The wall, our late inviolable bound,
  And best defence, lies smoking on the ground:
  Even to the ships their conquering arms extend,
  And groans of slaughter'd Greeks to heaven ascend.
  On speedy measures then employ your thought
  In such distress! if counsel profit aught:
  Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls incite,
  These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight."

  To him the monarch: "That our army bends,
  That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends,
  And that the rampart, late our surest trust
  And best defence, lies smoking in the dust;
  All this from Jove's afflictive hand we bear,
  Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here.
  Past are the days when happier Greece was blest,
  And all his favour, all his aid confess'd;
  Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties,
  And lifts the Trojan glory to the skies.
  Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain,
  And launch what ships lie nearest to the main;
  Leave these at anchor, till the coming night:
  Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight,
  Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight.
  Better from evils, well foreseen, to run,
  Than perish in the danger we may shun."

  Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,
  While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes:
  "What shameful words (unkingly as thou art)
  Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart?
  Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner powers,
  And thou the shame of any host but ours!
  A host, by Jove endued with martial might,
  And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight:
  Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage,
  Employ'd our youth, and yet employs our age.
  And wilt thou thus desert the Trojan plain?
  And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?
  In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear,
  Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
  Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares
  To think such meanness, or the thought declares?
  And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway
  The banded legions of all Greece obey?
  Is this a general's voice that calls to flight,
  While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
  What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies
  Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.
  No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,
  Themselves abandon'd) shall the fight pursue;
  But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;
  And owe destruction to a prince like thee."

  "Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)
  Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
  Unwilling as I am to lose the host,
  I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast;
  Glad I submit, whoe'er, or young, or old,
  Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold."

  Tydides cut him short, and thus began:
  "Such counsel if you seek, behold the man
  Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
  Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
  A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
  May speak to councils and assembled kings.
  Hear then in me the great OEnides' son,
  Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)
  Lies whelm'd in ruins of the Theban wall;
  Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
  With three bold sons was generous Prothous bless'd,
  Who Pleuron's walls and Calydon possess'd;
  Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpass'd
  The rest in courage) OEneus was the last.
  From him, my sire. From Calydon expell'd,
  He pass'd to Argos, and in exile dwell'd;
  The monarch's daughter there (so Jove ordain'd)
  He won, and flourish'd where Adrastus reign'd;
  There, rich in fortune's gifts, his acres till'd,
  Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield,
  And numerous flocks that whiten'd all the field.
  Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
  Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
  Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire,
  Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
  Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress'd,
  Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
  Advance the glory which he cannot share,
  Though not partaker, witness of the war.
  But lest new wounds on wounds o'erpower us quite,
  Beyond the missile javelin's sounding flight,
  Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far,
  Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war."

  He added not: the listening kings obey,
  Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
  The god of ocean (to inflame their rage)
  Appears a warrior furrowed o'er with age;
  Press'd in his own, the general's hand he took,
  And thus the venerable hero spoke:

  "Atrides! lo! with what disdainful eye
  Achilles sees his country's forces fly;
  Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide,
  Who glories in unutterable pride.
  So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
  The wretch relentless, and o'erwhelm with shame!
  But Heaven forsakes not thee: o'er yonder sands
  Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
  Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown'd,
  Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
  Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
  To hide their ignominious heads in Troy."

  He spoke, then rush'd amid the warrior crew,
  And sent his voice before him as he flew,
  Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
  When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
  Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
  Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
  Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight,
  And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.

  Meantime Saturnia from Olympus' brow,
  High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below;
  With joy the glorious conflict she survey'd,
  Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid.
  But placed aloft, on Ida's shady height
  She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight.
  Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try,
  What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye?
  At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove
  The old, yet still successful, cheat of love;
  Against his wisdom to oppose her charms,
  And lull the lord of thunders in her arms.

  Swift to her bright apartment she repairs,
  Sacred to dress and beauty's pleasing cares:
  With skill divine had Vulcan form'd the bower,
  Safe from access of each intruding power.
  Touch'd with her secret key, the doors unfold:
  Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of gold.
  Here first she bathes; and round her body pours
  Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers:
  The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey
  Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way:
  Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets
  The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
  Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride
  Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied;
  Part on her head in shining ringlets roll'd,
  Part o'er her shoulders waved like melted gold.
  Around her next a heavenly mantle flow'd,
  That rich with Pallas' labour'd colours glow'd:
  Large clasps of gold the foldings gather'd round,
  A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
  Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,
  Each gem illumined with a triple star.
  Then o'er her head she cast a veil more white
  Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
  Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
  Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace,
  Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves,
  And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.

  "How long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
  Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
  Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia's joy,
  And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?"

  "Let heaven's dread empress (Cytheraea said)
  Speak her request, and deem her will obey'd."

  "Then grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms,
  That power, which mortals and immortals warms,
  That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,
  And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!

  "For lo! I haste to those remote abodes,
  Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)
  Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep,
  On the last limits of the land and deep.
  In their kind arms my tender years were past;
  What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
  Of upper heaven to Jove resign'd the reign,
  Whelm'd under the huge mass of earth and main.
  For strife, I hear, has made the union cease,
  Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
  What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,
  If I compose those fatal feuds again;
  Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,
  And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!"

  She said. With awe divine, the queen of love
  Obey'd the sister and the wife of Jove;
  And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,(233)
  With various skill and high embroidery graced.
  In this was every art, and every charm,
  To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
  Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
  The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
  Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs,
  Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
  This on her hand the Cyprian Goddess laid:
  "Take this, and with it all thy wish;" she said.
  With smiles she took the charm; and smiling press'd
  The powerful cestus to her snowy breast.

  Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew;
  Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
  O'er high Pieria thence her course she bore,
  O'er fair Emathia's ever-pleasing shore,
  O'er Hemus' hills with snows eternal crown'd;
  Nor once her flying foot approach'd the ground.
  Then taking wing from Athos' lofty steep,
  She speeds to Lemnos o'er the rolling deep,
  And seeks the cave of Death's half-brother, Sleep.(234)

  "Sweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began)
  Who spread'st thy empire o'er each god and man;
  If e'er obsequious to thy Juno's will,
  O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.
  Shed thy soft dews on Jove's immortal eyes,
  While sunk in love's entrancing joys he lies.
  A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine
  With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;
  The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease,
  When wine and feasts thy golden humours please."

  "Imperial dame (the balmy power replies),
  Great Saturn's heir, and empress of the skies!
  O'er other gods I spread my easy chain;
  The sire of all, old Ocean, owns my reign.
  And his hush'd waves lie silent on the main.
  But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep
  Jove's awful temples in the dew of sleep?
  Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command,
  On those eternal lids I laid my hand;
  What time, deserting Ilion's wasted plain,
  His conquering son, Alcides, plough'd the main.
  When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar,
  And drive the hero to the Coan shore:
  Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodes
  With rising wrath, and tumbled gods on gods;
  Me chief he sought, and from the realms on high
  Had hurl'd indignant to the nether sky,
  But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid,
  (The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings display'd;
  Impower'd the wrath of gods and men to tame,
  Even Jove revered the venerable dame."

  "Vain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies,
  And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);
  Think'st thou that Troy has Jove's high favour won,
  Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son?
  Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,
  Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize;
  For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."(235)

  "Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
  That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
  Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
  And stretch the other o'er the sacred main:
  Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
  To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
  That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

  The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
  Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
  And those who rule the inviolable floods,
  Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.

        [Illustration: SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.]

                SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.


  Then swift as wind, o'er Lemnos' smoky isle
  They wing their way, and Imbrus' sea-beat soil;
  Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
  And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
  (Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
  Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
  Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
  Hush'd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
  There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
  To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
  Dark in embowering shade, conceal'd from sight,
  Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
  (Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
  But call'd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

  To Ida's top successful Juno flies;
  Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
  The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire,
  Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;
  Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms,
  Mix'd with her soul, and melted in her arms:
  Fix'd on her eyes he fed his eager look,
  Then press'd her hand, and thus with transport spoke:

  "Why comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,
  And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?"

  Then she--"I haste to those remote abodes
  Where the great parents of the deathless gods,
  The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys, reign,
  On the last limits of the land and main.
  I visit these, to whose indulgent cares
  I owe the nursing of my tender years:
  For strife, I hear, has made that union cease
  Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
  The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey
  O'er earth and seas, and through the aerial way,
  Wait under Ide: of thy superior power
  To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower;
  Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells
  Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells."

  "For that (said Jove) suffice another day!
  But eager love denies the least delay.
  Let softer cares the present hour employ,
  And be these moments sacred all to joy.
  Ne'er did my soul so strong a passion prove,
  Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love:
  Not when I press'd Ixion's matchless dame,
  Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame:
  Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold
  Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
  Not thus I burn'd for either Theban dame:
  (Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:)
  Nor Phoenix' daughter, beautiful and young,
  Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.(236)
  Not thus I burn'd for fair Latona's face,
  Nor comelier Ceres' more majestic grace.
  Not thus even for thyself I felt desire,
  As now my veins receive the pleasing fire."

  He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes
  Glows with celestial red, and thus replies:
  "Is this a scene for love? On Ida's height,
  Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
  Our joys profaned by each familiar eye;
  The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky:
  How shall I e'er review the blest abodes,
  Or mix among the senate of the gods?
  Shall I not think, that, with disorder'd charms,
  All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?
  With skill divine has Vulcan form'd thy bower,
  Sacred to love and to the genial hour;
  If such thy will, to that recess retire,
  In secret there indulge thy soft desire."

  She ceased; and, smiling with superior love,
  Thus answer'd mild the cloud-compelling Jove:
  "Nor god nor mortal shall our joys behold,
  Shaded with clouds, and circumfused in gold;
  Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his rays,
  And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys."

  Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view,
  His eager arms around the goddess threw.
  Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours
  Unbidden herbs and voluntary flowers:
  Thick new-born violets a soft carpet spread,
  And clustering lotos swell'd the rising bed,
  And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,(237)
  And flamy crocus made the mountain glow
  There golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair,
  Steep'd in soft joys and circumfused with air;
  Celestial dews, descending o'er the ground,
  Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round:
  At length, with love and sleep's soft power oppress'd,
  The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest.

  Now to the navy borne on silent wings,
  To Neptune's ear soft Sleep his message brings;
  Beside him sudden, unperceived, he stood,
  And thus with gentle words address'd the god:

  "Now, Neptune! now, the important hour employ,
  To check a while the haughty hopes of Troy:
  While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shed
  The golden vision round his sacred head;
  For Juno's love, and Somnus' pleasing ties,
  Have closed those awful and eternal eyes."
  Thus having said, the power of slumber flew,
  On human lids to drop the balmy dew.
  Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,
  And towering in the foremost ranks of war,
  Indignant thus--"Oh once of martial fame!
  O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name!
  This half-recover'd day shall Troy obtain?
  Shall Hector thunder at your ships again?
  Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
  One hero's loss too tamely you deplore,
  Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
  Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms,
  Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:
  His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield,
  Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;
  Let to the weak the lighter arms belong,
  The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
  Thus arm'd, not Hector shall our presence stay;
  Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way."

                      [Illustration: GREEK SHIELD.]

                              GREEK SHIELD.


  The troops assent; their martial arms they change:
  The busy chiefs their banded legions range.
  The kings, though wounded, and oppress'd with pain,
  With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
  The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,
  The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
  Thus sheath'd in shining brass, in bright array
  The legions march, and Neptune leads the way:
  His brandish'd falchion flames before their eyes,
  Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies.
  Clad in his might, the earth-shaking power appears;
  Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears.

  Troy's great defender stands alone unawed,
  Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god:
  And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear:
  The sea's stern ruler there, and Hector here.
  The roaring main, at her great master's call,
  Rose in huge ranks, and form'd a watery wall
  Around the ships: seas hanging o'er the shores,
  Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
  Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound,
  When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;
  Less loud the winds that from the Ãolian hall
  Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;
  Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,
  Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour;
  With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,
  And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
  The first bold javelin, urged by Hector's force,
  Direct at Ajax' bosom winged its course;
  But there no pass the crossing belts afford,
  (One braced his shield, and one sustain'd his sword.)
  Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
  And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:
  But 'scaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand
  A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,
  (Where heaps laid loose beneath the warrior's feet,
  Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,)
  Toss'd round and round, the missive marble flings;
  On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings,
  Full on his breast and throat with force descends;
  Nor deaden'd there its giddy fury spends,
  But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
  Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground.
  As when the bolt, red-hissing from above,
  Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,
  The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies,
  Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;
  Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand,
  And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
  So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore;
  His slacken'd hand deserts the lance it bore;
  His following shield the fallen chief o'erspread;
  Beneath his helmet dropp'd his fainting head;
  His load of armour, sinking to the ground,
  Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
  Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;
  Greece sees, in hope, Troy's great defender slain:
  All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly,
  And thicker javelins intercept the sky.
  In vain an iron tempest hisses round;
  He lies protected, and without a wound.(238)
  Polydamas, Agenor the divine,
  The pious warrior of Anchises' line,
  And each bold leader of the Lycian band,
  With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand,
  His mournful followers, with assistant care,
  The groaning hero to his chariot bear;
  His foaming coursers, swifter than the wind,
  Speed to the town, and leave the war behind.

  When now they touch'd the mead's enamell'd side,
  Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide,
  With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round,
  Placed on the margin of the flowery ground.
  Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore;
  Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore;
  By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies,
  And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes.

  Soon as the Greeks the chief's retreat beheld,
  With double fury each invades the field.
  Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped,
  Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled;
  (Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore
  Amidst her flocks on Satnio's silver shore;)
  Struck through the belly's rim, the warrior lies
  Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.
  An arduous battle rose around the dead;
  By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.

  Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near,
  And at Prothoenor shook the trembling spear;
  The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust,
  He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
  "Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,
  And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield:
  From this unerring hand there flies no dart
  But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
  Propp'd on that spear to which thou owest thy fall,
  Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto's dreary hall."

  He said, and sorrow touch'd each Argive breast:
  The soul of Ajax burn'd above the rest.
  As by his side the groaning warrior fell,
  At the fierce foe he launch'd his piercing steel;
  The foe, reclining, shunn'd the flying death;
  But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath:
  Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,
  The wings of death o'ertook thee on the dart;
  Swift to perform heaven's fatal will, it fled
  Full on the juncture of the neck and head,
  And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:
  The dropping head first tumbled on the plain.
  So just the stroke, that yet the body stood
  Erect, then roll'd along the sands in blood.

  "Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
  (The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)
  Say, is this chief extended on the plain
  A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
  Mark well his port! his figure and his face
  Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;
  Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known,
  Antenor's brother, or perhaps his son."

  He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew
  The bleeding youth: Troy sadden'd at the view.
  But furious Acamas avenged his cause;
  As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws,
  He pierced his heart--"Such fate attends you all,
  Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
  Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share
  The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.
  Behold your Promachus deprived of breath,
  A victim owed to my brave brother's death.
  Not unappeased he enters Pluto's gate,
  Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate."

  Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host,
  But touch'd the breast of bold Peneleus most;
  At the proud boaster he directs his course;
  The boaster flies, and shuns superior force.
  But young Ilioneus received the spear;
  Ilioneus, his father's only care:
  (Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train
  Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:)
  Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall,
  And from the fibres scoop'd the rooted ball,
  Drove through the neck, and hurl'd him to the plain;
  He lifts his miserable arms in vain!
  Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread,
  And from the spouting shoulders struck his head;
  To earth at once the head and helmet fly;
  The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye,
  The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook
  The gory visage, thus insulting spoke:

  "Trojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
  Haste, to his father let the tale be told:
  Let his high roofs resound with frantic woe,
  Such as the house of Promachus must know;
  Let doleful tidings greet his mother's ear,
  Such as to Promachus' sad spouse we bear,
  When we victorious shall to Greece return,
  And the pale matron in our triumphs mourn."

  Dreadful he spoke, then toss'd the head on high;
  The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly:
  Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall,
  And dread the ruin that impends on all.

  Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,
  Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine!
  O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield,
  What chief, what hero first embrued the field?
  Of all the Grecians what immortal name,
  And whose bless'd trophies, will ye raise to fame?

  Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain
  Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train.
  Phalces and Mermer, Nestor's son o'erthrew,
  Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
  Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,
  By Teucer's arrows mingled with the dead,
  Pierced in the flank by Menelaus' steel,
  His people's pastor, Hyperenor fell;
  Eternal darkness wrapp'd the warrior round,
  And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound.
  But stretch'd in heaps before Oileus' son,
  Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;
  Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race
  Skill'd in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.

                         [Illustration: BACCHUS.]

                                 BACCHUS.





BOOK XV.


ARGUMENT.

THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.

Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector in a
swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly incensed at the
artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; she is then sent to
Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of the gods, attempts,
with extraordinary address, to incense them against Jupiter; in particular
she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he is ready to take arms, but
is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris
commands Neptune to leave the battle, to which, after much reluctance and
passion, he consents. Apollo reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him
back to the battle, marches before him with his aegis, and turns the
fortune of the fight. He breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the
Trojans rush in, and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are,
as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.

  Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
  Then stopp'd and panted, where the chariots lie
  Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
  Meanwhile, awaken'd from his dream of love,
  On Ida's summit sat imperial Jove:
  Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
  There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
  These proud in arms, those scatter'd o'er the plain
  And, 'midst the war, the monarch of the main.
  Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
  (His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
  Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
  His senses wandering to the verge of death.
  The god beheld him with a pitying look,
  And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:

  "O thou, still adverse to the eternal will,
  For ever studious in promoting ill!
  Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
  And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
  Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand
  Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
  Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix'd on high,
  From the vast concave of the spangled sky,
  I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,
  And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
  Headlong I hurl'd them from the Olympian hall,
  Stunn'd in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.
  For godlike Hercules these deeds were done,
  Nor seem'd the vengeance worthy such a son:
  When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas toss'd
  The shipwreck'd hero on the Coan coast,
  Him through a thousand forms of death I bore,
  And sent to Argos, and his native shore.
  Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,
  Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head;
  Lest arts and blandishments successless prove,
  Thy soft deceits, and well-dissembled love."

  The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mourn'd,
  And, trembling, these submissive words return'd:

  "By every oath that powers immortal ties,
  The foodful earth and all-infolding skies;
  By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that flow
  Through the drear realms of gliding ghosts below;
  By the dread honours of thy sacred head,
  And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed!
  Not by my arts the ruler of the main
  Steeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain:
  By his own ardour, his own pity sway'd,
  To help his Greeks, he fought and disobey'd:
  Else had thy Juno better counsels given,
  And taught submission to the sire of heaven."

  "Think'st thou with me? fair empress of the skies!
  (The immortal father with a smile replies;)
  Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey,
  Nor dare to act but when we point the way.
  If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will
  To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill;
  Our high decree let various Iris know,
  And call the god that bears the silver bow.
  Let her descend, and from the embattled plain
  Command the sea-god to his watery reign:
  While Phoebus hastes great Hector to prepare
  To rise afresh, and once more wake the war:
  His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath,
  And calls his senses from the verge of death.
  Greece chased by Troy, even to Achilles' fleet,
  Shall fall by thousands at the hero's feet.
  He, not untouch'd with pity, to the plain
  Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
  What youths he slaughters under Ilion's walls!
  Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls!
  Vanquish'd at last by Hector's lance he lies.
  Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
  And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
  From that great hour the war's whole fortune turns,
  Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
  Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage,
  Nor one of all the heavenly host engage
  In aid of Greece. The promise of a god
  I gave, and seal'd it with the almighty nod,
  Achilles' glory to the stars to raise;
  Such was our word, and fate the word obeys."

  The trembling queen (the almighty order given)
  Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
  As some wayfaring man, who wanders o'er
  In thought a length of lands he trod before,
  Sends forth his active mind from place to place,
  Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:
  So swift flew Juno to the bless'd abodes,
  If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
  There sat the powers in awful synod placed;
  They bow'd, and made obeisance as she pass'd
  Through all the brazen dome: with goblets crown'd(239)
  They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
  Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,
  And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?

  To whom the white-arm'd goddess thus replies:
  "Enough thou know'st the tyrant of the skies,
  Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,
  Unmoved his mind, and unrestrain'd his will.
  Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call;
  Bid the crown'd nectar circle round the hall:
  But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome
  Such stern decrees, such threaten'd woes to come,
  As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise,
  And damp the eternal banquets of the skies."

  The goddess said, and sullen took her place;
  Black horror sadden'd each celestial face.
  To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
  Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy express'd;
  While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,
  Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
  Thus she proceeds--"Attend, ye powers above!
  But know, 'tis madness to contest with Jove:
  Supreme he sits; and sees, in pride of sway.
  Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey:
  Fierce in the majesty of power controls;
  Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.
  Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey:
  And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way.
  Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,
  But dare not murmur, dare not vent a sigh;
  Thy own loved boasted offspring lies o'erthrown,
  If that loved boasted offspring be thy own."

  Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughter'd son,
  Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun:
  "Thus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
  Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:
  Descending first to yon forbidden plain,
  The god of battles dares avenge the slain;
  Dares, though the thunder bursting o'er my head
  Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead."

  With that he gives command to Fear and Flight
  To join his rapid coursers for the fight:
  Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;
  Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies.
  And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,
  Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven;
  But Pallas, springing through the bright abode,
  Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
  Struck for the immortal race with timely fear,
  From frantic Mars she snatch'd the shield and spear;
  Then the huge helmet lifting from his head,
  Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

  "By what wild passion, furious! art thou toss'd?
  Striv'st thou with Jove? thou art already lost.
  Shall not the Thunderer's dread command restrain,
  And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
  Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,
  And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven?
  Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage,
  The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;
  Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate
  And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
  Cease then thy offspring's death unjust to call;
  Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
  Why should heaven's law with foolish man comply
  Exempted from the race ordain'd to die?"

  This menace fix'd the warrior to his throne;
  Sullen he sat, and curb'd the rising groan.
  Then Juno call'd (Jove's orders to obey)
  The winged Iris, and the god of day.
  "Go wait the Thunderer's will (Saturnia cried)
  On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide:
  There in the father's awful presence stand,
  Receive, and execute his dread command."

  She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day,
  And various Iris, wing their airy way.
  Swift as the wind, to Ida's hills they came,
  (Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game)
  There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls
  The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.
  Veil'd in a mist of fragrance him they found,
  With clouds of gold and purple circled round.
  Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care,
  And prompt obedience to the queen of air;
  Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow)
  Commands the goddess of the showery bow:

  "Iris! descend, and what we here ordain,
  Report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
  Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair,
  Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air.
  If he refuse, then let him timely weigh
  Our elder birthright, and superior sway.
  How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms,
  If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
  Strives he with me, by whom his power was given,
  And is there equal to the lord of heaven?"

  The all-mighty spoke; the goddess wing'd her flight
  To sacred Ilion from the Idaean height.
  Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows,
  Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows;
  So from the clouds descending Iris falls,
  And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls:

  "Attend the mandate of the sire above!
  In me behold the messenger of Jove:
  He bids thee from forbidden wars repair
  To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air.
  This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh
  His elder birthright, and superior sway.
  How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms
  If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
  Striv'st thou with him by whom all power is given?
  And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?"

  "What means the haughty sovereign of the skies?
  (The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;)
  Rule as he will his portion'd realms on high;
  No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.
  Three brother deities from Saturn came,
  And ancient Rhea, earth's immortal dame:
  Assign'd by lot, our triple rule we know;
  Infernal Pluto sways the shades below;
  O'er the wide clouds, and o'er the starry plain,
  Ethereal Jove extends his high domain;
  My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,
  And hush the roarings of the sacred deep;
  Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:
  What claim has here the tyrant of the sky?
  Far in the distant clouds let him control,
  And awe the younger brothers of the pole;
  There to his children his commands be given,
  The trembling, servile, second race of heaven."

  "And must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
  Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
  Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent;
  A noble mind disdains not to repent.
  To elder brothers guardian fiends are given,
  To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven."

  "Great is the profit (thus the god rejoin'd)
  When ministers are blest with prudent mind:
  Warn'd by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,
  And quit, though angry, the contended field:
  Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,
  The same our honours, and our birth the same.
  If yet, forgetful of his promise given
  To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven,
  To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,
  He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race;
  Give him to know, unless the Grecian train
  Lay yon proud structures level with the plain,
  Howe'er the offence by other gods be pass'd,
  The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last."

  Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode,
  And plunged into the bosom of the flood.
  The lord of thunders, from his lofty height
  Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:

  "Behold! the god whose liquid arms are hurl'd
  Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,
  Desists at length his rebel-war to wage,
  Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our rage;
  Else had my wrath, heaven's thrones all shaking round,
  Burn'd to the bottom of his seas profound;
  And all the gods that round old Saturn dwell
  Had heard the thunders to the deeps of hell.
  Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared;
  Even power immense had found such battle hard.
  Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm,
  Shake my broad aegis on thy active arm,
  Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care,
  Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war:
  Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train
  Fly to their ships and Hellespont again:
  Then Greece shall breathe from toils." The godhead said;
  His will divine the son of Jove obey'd.
  Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies,
  That drives a turtle through the liquid skies,
  As Phoebus, shooting from the Idaean brow,
  Glides down the mountain to the plain below.
  There Hector seated by the stream he sees,
  His sense returning with the coming breeze;
  Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise;
  Again his loved companions meet his eyes;
  Jove thinking of his pains, they pass'd away,
  To whom the god who gives the golden day:

  "Why sits great Hector from the field so far?
  What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?"

  The fainting hero, as the vision bright
  Stood shining o'er him, half unseal'd his sight:

  "What blest immortal, with commanding breath,
  Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
  Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
  Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
  The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
  Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
  Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
  And hell's black horrors swim before my eye."

  To him Apollo: "Be no more dismay'd;
  See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
  Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ,
  Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
  Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
  And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
  Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
  And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea."

  Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
  And breathed immortal ardour from above.
  As when the pamper'd steed, with reins unbound,
  Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
  With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
  To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
  His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
  He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
  Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
  Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
  As when the force of men and dogs combined
  Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
  Far from the hunter's rage secure they lie
  Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
  When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
  They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
  So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
  And mark'd their progress through the ranks in blood,
  Soon as they see the furious chief appear,
  Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.

  Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course,
  Thoas, the bravest of the Ãtolian force;
  Skill'd to direct the javelin's distant flight,
  And bold to combat in the standing fight,
  Not more in councils famed for solid sense,
  Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.
  "Gods! what portent (he cried) these eyes invades?
  Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian shades!
  We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax kill'd:
  What god restores him to the frighted field;
  And not content that half of Greece lie slain,
  Pours new destruction on her sons again?
  He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will;
  Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
  Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand:
  The Greeks' main body to the fleet command;
  But let the few whom brisker spirits warm,
  Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.
  Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear,
  Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear."

  The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey,
  Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.

  Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command,
  The valiant leader of the Cretan band;
  And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite,
  Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight.
  Behind, unnumber'd multitudes attend,
  To flank the navy, and the shores defend.
  Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear,
  And Hector first came towering to the war.
  Phoebus himself the rushing battle led;
  A veil of clouds involved his radiant head:
  High held before him, Jove's enormous shield
  Portentous shone, and shaded all the field;
  Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consign'd,
  To scatter hosts and terrify mankind,
  The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise
  From different parts, and mingle in the skies.
  Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung,
  And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung;
  These drink the life of generous warriors slain:
  Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain.
  As long as Phoebus bore unmoved the shield,
  Sat doubtful conquest hovering o'er the field;
  But when aloft he shakes it in the skies,
  Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes,
  Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast,
  Their force is humbled, and their fear confess'd.
  So flies a herd of oxen, scatter'd wide,
  No swain to guard them, and no day to guide,
  When two fell lions from the mountain come,
  And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.
  Impending Phoebus pours around them fear,
  And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.
  Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads,
  First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds;
  One to the bold Boeotians ever dear,
  And one Menestheus' friend and famed compeer.
  Medon and Iasus, Ãneas sped;
  This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led;
  But hapless Medon from Oileus came;
  Him Ajax honour'd with a brother's name,
  Though born of lawless love: from home expell'd,
  A banish'd man, in Phylace he dwell'd,
  Press'd by the vengeance of an angry wife;
  Troy ends at last his labours and his life.
  Mecystes next Polydamas o'erthrew;
  And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew.
  By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
  Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
  Polites' arm laid Echius on the plain;
  Stretch'd on one heap, the victors spoil the slain.
  The Greeks dismay'd, confused, disperse or fall,
  Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.
  While these fly trembling, others pant for breath,
  And o'er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
  On rush'd bold Hector, gloomy as the night;
  Forbids to plunder, animates the fight,
  Points to the fleet: "For, by the gods! who flies,(240)
  Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies;
  No weeping sister his cold eye shall close,
  No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose.
  Who stops to plunder at this signal hour,
  The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour."
  Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds;
  The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds;
  The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore;
  The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!
  Apollo, planted at the trench's bound,
  Push'd at the bank: down sank the enormous mound:
  Roll'd in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;
  A sudden road! a long and ample way.
  O'er the dread fosse (a late impervious space)
  Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
  The wondering crowds the downward level trod;
  Before them flamed the shield, and march'd the god.
  Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
  And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
  Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
  And draws imagined houses in the sands;
  The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
  Sweeps the slight works and fashion'd domes away:
  Thus vanish'd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
  The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

  The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
  Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer:
  Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;
  And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
  Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,
  And weeps his country with a father's eyes.

  "O Jove! if ever, on his native shore,
  One Greek enrich'd thy shrine with offer'd gore;
  If e'er, in hope our country to behold,
  We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;
  If e'er thou sign'st our wishes with thy nod:
  Perform the promise of a gracious god!
  This day preserve our navies from the flame,
  And save the relics of the Grecian name."

  Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent,
  And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
  Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign,
  And catch'd new fury at the voice divine.
  As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies,
  The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,
  Above the sides of some tall ship ascend,
  Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend:
  Thus loudly roaring, and o'erpowering all,
  Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall;
  Legions on legions from each side arise:
  Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
  Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,
  These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw.

  While thus the thunder of the battle raged,
  And labouring armies round the works engaged,
  Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend
  The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
  He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind,
  And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
  But when he saw, ascending up the fleet,
  Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat,
  With bitter groans his sorrows he express'd,
  He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast.
  "Though yet thy state require redress (he cries)
  Depart I must: what horrors strike my eyes!
  Charged with Achilles' high command I go,
  A mournful witness of this scene of woe;
  I haste to urge him by his country's care
  To rise in arms, and shine again in war.
  Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend;
  The voice is powerful of a faithful friend."

  He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind
  Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind.
  The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain,
  But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain:
  Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array,
  Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way.
  As when a shipwright, with Palladian art,
  Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part;
  With equal hand he guides his whole design,
  By the just rule, and the directing line:
  The martial leaders, with like skill and care,
  Preserved their line, and equal kept the war.
  Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried,
  And every ship sustained an equal tide.
  At one proud bark, high-towering o'er the fleet,
  Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet;
  For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend,
  Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend:
  One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod;
  That fix'd as fate, this acted by a god.
  The son of Clytius in his daring hand,
  The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand;
  But, pierced by Telamon's huge lance, expires:
  Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguish'd fires.
  Great Hector view'd him with a sad survey,
  As stretch'd in dust before the stern he lay.
  "Oh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian race!
  Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space:
  Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies;
  Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!"

  This said, his eager javelin sought the foe:
  But Ajax shunn'd the meditated blow.
  Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown;
  It stretch'd in dust unhappy Lycophron:
  An exile long, sustain'd at Ajax' board,
  A faithful servant to a foreign lord;
  In peace, and war, for ever at his side,
  Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.
  From the high poop he tumbles on the sand,
  And lies a lifeless load along the land.
  With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight,
  And thus inflames his brother to the fight:

  "Teucer, behold! extended on the shore
  Our friend, our loved companion! now no more!
  Dear as a parent, with a parent's care
  To fight our wars he left his native air.
  This death deplored, to Hector's rage we owe;
  Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
  Where are those darts on which the fates attend?
  And where the bow which Phoebus taught to bend?"

  Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid,
  Before the chief his ample bow display'd;
  The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung:
  Then hiss'd his arrow, and the bowstring sung.
  Clytus, Pisenor's son, renown'd in fame,
  (To thee, Polydamas! an honour'd name)
  Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains
  The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.
  As all on glory ran his ardent mind,
  The pointed death arrests him from behind:
  Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies;
  In youth's first bloom reluctantly he dies.
  Hurl'd from the lofty seat, at distance far,
  The headlong coursers spurn his empty car;
  Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrain'd,
  And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand;
  Then, fired to vengeance, rush'd amidst the foe:
  Rage edged his sword, and strengthen'd every blow.

  Once more bold Teucer, in his country's cause,
  At Hector's breast a chosen arrow draws:
  And had the weapon found the destined way,
  Thy fall, great Trojan! had renown'd that day.
  But Hector was not doom'd to perish then:
  The all-wise disposer of the fates of men
  (Imperial Jove) his present death withstands;
  Nor was such glory due to Teucer's hands.
  At its full stretch as the tough string he drew,
  Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two;
  Down dropp'd the bow: the shaft with brazen head
  Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.
  The astonish'd archer to great Ajax cries;
  "Some god prevents our destined enterprise:
  Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe,
  Has, from my arm unfailing, struck the bow,
  And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art,
  Strong to impel the flight of many a dart."

  "Since heaven commands it (Ajax made reply)
  Dismiss the bow, and lay thy arrows by:
  Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield,
  And quit the quiver for the ponderous shield.
  In the first ranks indulge thy thirst of fame,
  Thy brave example shall the rest inflame.
  Fierce as they are, by long successes vain;
  To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain,
  Asks toil, and sweat, and blood: their utmost might
  Shall find its match--No more: 'tis ours to fight."

  Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside;
  The fourfold buckler o'er his shoulder tied;
  On his brave head a crested helm he placed,
  With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
  A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,
  The warrior wields; and his great brother joins.

  This Hector saw, and thus express'd his joy:
  "Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
  Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame,
  And spread your glory with the navy's flame.
  Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now,
  From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:
  Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine,
  When happy nations bear the marks divine!
  How easy then, to see the sinking state
  Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
  Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours:
  Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
  Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;
  And for our country, 'tis a bliss to die.
  The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,
  Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free;
  Entails a debt on all the grateful state;
  His own brave friends shall glory in his fate;
  His wife live honour'd, all his race succeed,
  And late posterity enjoy the deed!"

  This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:
  The godlike Ajax next his Greeks address'd:

  "How long, ye warriors of the Argive race,
  (To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)
  How long on these cursed confines will ye lie,
  Yet undetermined, or to live or die?
  What hopes remain, what methods to retire,
  If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?
  Make how the flames approach, how near they fall,
  How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
  Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites,
  It calls to death, and all the rage of fights.
  'Tis now no time for wisdom or debates;
  To your own hands are trusted all your fates;
  And better far in one decisive strife,
  One day should end our labour or our life,
  Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands,
  Still press'd, and press'd by such inglorious hands."

  The listening Grecians feel their leader's flame,
  And every kindling bosom pants for fame.
  Then mutual slaughters spread on either side;
  By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
  There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
  Chief of the foot, of old Antenor's race.
  Polydamas laid Otus on the sand,
  The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
  His lance bold Meges at the victor threw;
  The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;
  (That valued life, O Phoebus! was thy care)
  But Croesmus' bosom took the flying spear:
  His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore;
  His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
  Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on,
  Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,
  And famed for prowess in a well-fought field,
  He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:
  But Meges, Phyleus' ample breastplate wore,
  (Well-known in fight on Selle's winding shore;
  For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,
  Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale)
  Which oft, in cities storm'd, and battles won,
  Had saved the father, and now saves the son.
  Full at the Trojan's head he urged his lance,
  Where the high plumes above the helmet dance,
  New ting'd with Tyrian dye: in dust below,
  Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.
  Meantime their fight the Spartan king survey'd,
  And stood by Meges' side a sudden aid.
  Through Dolops' shoulder urged his forceful dart,
  Which held its passage through the panting heart,
  And issued at his breast. With thundering sound
  The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
  In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:
  But Hector's voice excites his kindred train;
  The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
  Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
  He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross'd the main)
  Fed his large oxen on Percote's plain;
  But when oppress'd, his country claim'd his care,
  Return'd to Ilion, and excell'd in war;
  For this, in Priam's court, he held his place,
  Beloved no less than Priam's royal race.
  Him Hector singled, as his troops he led,
  And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.

  "Lo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;
  And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
  O'ermatch'd he falls; to two at once a prey,
  And lo! they bear the bloody arms away!
  Come on--a distant war no longer wage,
  But hand to hand thy country's foes engage:
  Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;
  Or Ilion from her towery height descend,
  Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all
  In one sad sepulchre, one common fall."

  Hector (this said) rush'd forward on the foes:
  With equal ardour Melanippus glows:
  Then Ajax thus--"O Greeks! respect your fame,
  Respect yourselves, and learn an honest shame:
  Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire,
  And catch from breast to breast the noble fire,
  On valour's side the odds of combat lie;
  The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
  The wretch that trembles in the field of fame,
  Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame."

  His generous sense he not in vain imparts;
  It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts:
  They join, they throng, they thicken at his call,
  And flank the navy with a brazen wall;
  Shields touching shields, in order blaze above,
  And stop the Trojans, though impell'd by Jove.
  The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.
  Warms the bold son of Nestor in his cause.
  "Is there (he said) in arms a youth like you,
  So strong to fight, so active to pursue?
  Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?
  Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed."

  He said; and backward to the lines retired;
  Forth rush'd the youth with martial fury fired,
  Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw,
  And round the black battalions cast his view.
  The troops of Troy recede with sudden fear,
  While the swift javelin hiss'd along in air.
  Advancing Melanippus met the dart
  With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart:
  Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound,
  And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
  The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize:
  Thus on a roe the well-breath'd beagle flies,
  And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart
  The distant hunter sent into his heart.
  Observing Hector to the rescue flew;
  Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew.
  So when a savage, ranging o'er the plain,
  Has torn the shepherd's dog, or shepherd's swain,
  While conscious of the deed, he glares around,
  And hears the gathering multitude resound,
  Timely he flies the yet-untasted food,
  And gains the friendly shelter of the wood:
  So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue,
  While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;
  But enter'd in the Grecian ranks, he turns
  His manly breast, and with new fury burns.

  Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,
  Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove:
  The sire of gods, confirming Thetis' prayer,
  The Grecian ardour quench'd in deep despair;
  But lifts to glory Troy's prevailing bands,
  Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
  On Ida's top he waits with longing eyes,
  To view the navy blazing to the skies;
  Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn,
  The Trojans fly, and conquer'd Ilion burn.
  These fates revolved in his almighty mind,
  He raises Hector to the work design'd,
  Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
  And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
  So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call,
  Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
  Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,
  Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
  He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow
  Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow:
  The radiant helmet on his temple burns,
  Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
  For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown,
  And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
  Unhappy glories! for his fate was near,
  Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides' spear:
  Yet Jove deferr'd the death he was to pay,
  And gave what fate allow'd, the honours of a day!

  Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes
  Burn at each foe, and single every prize;
  Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight,
  He points his ardour, and exerts his might.
  The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower,
  On all sides batter'd, yet resists his power:
  So some tall rock o'erhangs the hoary main,(241)
  By winds assail'd, by billows beat in vain,
  Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow,
  And sees the watery mountains break below.
  Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall
  Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:
  Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends,
  And, swell'd with tempests, on the ship descends;
  White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud
  Howl o'er the masts, and sing through every shroud:
  Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears;
  And instant death on every wave appears.
  So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet,
  The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet.

  As when a lion, rushing from his den,
  Amidst the plain of some wide-water'd fen,
  (Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,
  At large expatiate o'er the ranker mead)
  Leaps on the herds before the herdsman's eyes;
  The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;
  Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
  He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
  Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew
  All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew:
  Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,
  In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame;
  The minister of stern Eurystheus' ire
  Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire:
  The son redeem'd the honours of the race,
  A son as generous as the sire was base;
  O'er all his country's youth conspicuous far
  In every virtue, or of peace or war:
  But doom'd to Hector's stronger force to yield!
  Against the margin of his ample shield
  He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;
  Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung.
  On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press'd,
  And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
  His circling friends, who strove to guard too late
  The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.

  Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train
  Now man the next, receding toward the main:
  Wedged in one body at the tents they stand,
  Wall'd round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
  Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;
  Now fear itself confines them to the fight:
  Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most
  (The sage preserver of the Grecian host)
  Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;
  And by their parents, by themselves implores.

  "Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame
  With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
  Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care
  Your wives, your infants, and your parents share:
  Think of each living father's reverend head;
  Think of each ancestor with glory dead;
  Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
  They ask their safety, and their fame, from you:
  The gods their fates on this one action lay,
  And all are lost, if you desert the day."

  He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires;
  Minerva seconds what the sage inspires.
  The mist of darkness Jove around them threw
  She clear'd, restoring all the war to view;
  A sudden ray shot beaming o'er the plain,
  And show'd the shores, the navy, and the main:
  Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight,
  The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light,
  First of the field great Ajax strikes their eyes,
  His port majestic, and his ample size:
  A ponderous mace with studs of iron crown'd,
  Full twenty cubits long, he swings around;
  Nor fights, like others, fix'd to certain stands
  But looks a moving tower above the bands;
  High on the decks with vast gigantic stride,
  The godlike hero stalks from side to side.
  So when a horseman from the watery mead
  (Skill'd in the manage of the bounding steed)
  Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey,
  To some great city through the public way;
  Safe in his art, as side by side they run,
  He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one;
  And now to this, and now to that he flies;
  Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.

  From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
  No less the wonder of the warring crew.
  As furious, Hector thunder'd threats aloud,
  And rush'd enraged before the Trojan crowd;
  Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores
  Lay rank'd contiguous on the bending shores;
  So the strong eagle from his airy height,
  Who marks the swans' or cranes' embodied flight,
  Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,
  And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
  Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,
  And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
  The warring nations meet, the battle roars,
  Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
  Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire,
  No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;
  As if new vigour from new fights they won,
  And the long battle was but then begun.
  Greece, yet unconquer'd, kept alive the war,
  Secure of death, confiding in despair:
  Troy in proud hopes already view'd the main
  Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain:
  Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,
  And each contends, as his were all the war.

  "Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand
  First seized a ship on that contested strand;
  The same which dead Protesilaus bore,(242)
  The first that touch'd the unhappy Trojan shore:
  For this in arms the warring nations stood,
  And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.
  No room to poise the lance or bend the bow;
  But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow:
  Wounded, they wound; and seek each other's hearts
  With falchions, axes, swords, and shorten'd darts.
  The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound,
  Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground;
  With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  Still raging, Hector with his ample hand
  Grasps the high stern, and gives this loud command:

             [Illustration: AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.]

                     AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.


  "Haste, bring the flames! that toil of ten long years
  Is finished; and the day desired appears!
  This happy day with acclamations greet,
  Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
  The coward-counsels of a timorous throng
  Of reverend dotards check'd our glory long:
  Too long Jove lull'd us with lethargic charms,
  But now in peals of thunder calls to arms:
  In this great day he crowns our full desires,
  Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires."

  He spoke--the warriors at his fierce command
  Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band.
  Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,)
  Stepp'd back, and doubted or to live or die.
  Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait
  What chief approaching dares attempt his fate:
  Even to the last his naval charge defends,
  Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends;
  Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires,
  Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires.

  "O friends! O heroes! names for ever dear,
  Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war!
  Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown,
  Your great forefathers' virtues and your own.
  What aids expect you in this utmost strait?
  What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
  No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend,
  No friends to help, no city to defend.
  This spot is all you have, to lose or keep;
  There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep.
  'Tis hostile ground you tread; your native lands
  Far, far from hence: your fates are in your hands."

  Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath,
  But turns his javelin to the work of death.
  Whate'er bold Trojan arm'd his daring hands,
  Against the sable ships, with flaming brands,
  So well the chief his naval weapon sped,
  The luckless warrior at his stern lay dead:
  Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

                    [Illustration: CASTOR AND POLLUX.]

                            CASTOR AND POLLUX.





BOOK XVI.


ARGUMENT

THE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS

Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book)
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks with
Achilles' troops and armour. He agrees to it, but at the same time charges
him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without further pursuit of
the enemy. The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are described.
Achilles offers a libation for the success of his friend, after which
Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The Trojans, at the sight of
Patroclus in Achilles' armour, taking him for that hero, are cast into the
uttermost consternation; he beats them off from the vessels, Hector
himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was averse to his fate.
Several other particulars of the battle are described; in the heat of
which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders of Achilles, pursues the foe to
the walls of Troy, where Apollo repulses and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds
him, and Hector kills him, which concludes the book.

  So warr'd both armies on the ensanguined shore,
  While the black vessels smoked with human gore.
  Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
  The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes
  Not faster, trickling to the plains below,
  From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
  Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
  Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:(243)

  "Patroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears,
  That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
  No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps
  From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;
  Not more the mother's soul, that infant warms,
  Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms,
  Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end
  Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?

  "Griev'st thou for me, or for, my martial band?
  Or come sad tidings from our native land?
  Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),
  Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air,
  And hoary Peleus yet extends his days;
  Pleased in their age to hear their children's praise.
  Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
  Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,
  Doom'd in their ships to sink by fire and sword,
  And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord?
  Whate'er the cause, reveal thy secret care,
  And speak those sorrows which a friend would share."
  A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,
  Another follow'd, and Patroclus spoke:

  "Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,
  Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
  Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent,
  Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:
  Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' son,
  And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,
  More for their country's wounds than for their own.
  Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,
  Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
  May never rage like thine my soul enslave,
  O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
  Thy country slighted in her last distress,
  What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
  No--men unborn, and ages yet behind,
  Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.

  "O man unpitying! if of man thy race;
  But sure thou spring'st not from a soft embrace,
  Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth,
  Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:
  Some rugged rock's hard entrails gave thee form,
  And raging seas produced thee in a storm,
  A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind,
  So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.

  "If some dire oracle thy breast alarm,
  If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,
  Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
  If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:
  Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear,
  Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war;
  Without thy person Greece shall win the day,
  And thy mere image chase her foes away.
  Press'd by fresh forces, her o'erlabour'd train
  Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again."
  Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,
  Thou begg'st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
  Unfortunately good! a boding sigh
  Thy friend return'd; and with it, this reply:
  "Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears;
  Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;
  Nor aught a mother's caution can suggest;
  The tyrant's pride lies rooted in my breast.
  My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage,
  Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:
  I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong
  Even my: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
  The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,
  Due to the toils of many a well-fought day;
  Due to my conquest of her father's reign;
  Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
  From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the meanest slave.
  But bear we this--the wrongs I grieve are past;
  'Tis time our fury should relent at last:
  I fix'd its date; the day I wish'd appears:
  How Hector to my ships his battle bears,
  The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears.
  Go then, Patroclus! court fair honour's charms
  In Troy's famed fields, and in Achilles' arms:
  Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,
  Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right.
  See the thin relics of their baffled band
  At the last edge of yon deserted land!
  Behold all Ilion on their ships descends;
  How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
  It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,
  Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed:
  Had not the injurious king our friendship lost,
  Yon ample trench had buried half her host.
  No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear,
  Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there;
  No longer flames the lance of Tydeus' son;
  No more your general calls his heroes on:
  Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath
  Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.
  Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain:
  Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain,
  And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
  But heed my words, and mark a friend's command,
  Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand,
  And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host
  Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost:
  Rage uncontroll'd through all the hostile crew,
  But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
  Though Jove in thunder should command the war,
  Be just, consult my glory, and forbear.
  The fleet once saved, desist from further chase,
  Nor lead to Ilion's walls the Grecian race;
  Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy;
  Some god, like Phoebus, ever kind to Troy.
  Let Greece, redeem'd from this destructive strait,
  Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate.
  O! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
  That not one Trojan might be left alive,
  And not a Greek of all the race survive:
  Might only we the vast destruction shun,
  And only we destroy the accursed town!"
  Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand
  Great Jove with conquest crown'd the Trojan band.
  Ajax no more the sounding storm sustain'd,
  So thick the darts an iron tempest rain'd:
  On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung;
  His hollow helm with falling javelins rung;
  His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;
  And painful sweat from all his members flows.
  Spent and o'erpower'd, he barely breathes at most;
  Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post;
  Dangers on dangers all around him glow,
  And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.

  Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame,
  How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?

  Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near,
  Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,
  Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped,
  That the broad falchion lopp'd its brazen head;
  His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;
  The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
  Great Ajax saw, and own'd the hand divine;
  Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign,
  Warn'd he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
  The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower;
  O'er the high stern the curling volumes rise,
  And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.

  Divine Achilles view'd the rising flames,
  And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:
  "Arm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires!
  The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
  Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame;
  Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;
  I haste to bring the troops."--The hero said;
  The friend with ardour and with joy obey'd.

  He cased his limbs in brass; and first around
  His manly legs, with silver buckles bound
  The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies
  The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes;
  Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone
  In the rich belt, as in a starry zone:
  Achilles' shield his ample shoulders spread,
  Achilles' helmet nodded o'er his head:
  Adorn'd in all his terrible array,
  He flash'd around intolerable day.
  Alone untouch'd, Pelides' javelin stands,
  Not to be poised but by Pelides' hands:
  From Pelion's shady brow the plant entire
  Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his sire;
  Whose son's great arm alone the weapon wields,
  The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

                         [Illustration: Buckles.]

                                 Buckles.


  The brave Automedon (an honour'd name,
  The second to his lord in love and fame,
  In peace his friend, and partner of the war)
  The winged coursers harness'd to the car;
  Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed,
  Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.
  Whom the wing'd harpy, swift Podarge, bore,
  By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore:
  Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
  (Once great Aetion's, now Achilles' pride)
  Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,
  A mortal courser match'd the immortal race.

  Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms
  His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
  All breathing death, around the chief they stand,
  A grim, terrific, formidable band:
  Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs(244)
  When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;
  When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,
  Has drench'd their wide insatiate throats with blood,
  To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,
  With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue,
  Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore,
  And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.
  Like furious, rush'd the Myrmidonian crew,
  Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.

  High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
  Directs their order, and the war commands.
  He, loved of Jove, had launch'd for Ilion's shores
  Full fifty vessels, mann'd with fifty oars:
  Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey,
  Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.

  First march'd Menestheus, of celestial birth,
  Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,
  Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood!
  A mortal mother mixing with a god.
  Such was Menestheus, but miscall'd by fame
  The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.

  Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
  Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
  Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze,
  As with swift step she form'd the running maze:
  To her high chamber from Diana's quire,
  The god pursued her, urged, and crown'd his fire.
  The son confess'd his father's heavenly race,
  And heir'd his mother's swiftness in the chase.
  Strong Echecleus, bless'd in all those charms
  That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms;
  Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame,
  With gifts of price he sought and won the dame;
  Her secret offspring to her sire she bare;
  Her sire caress'd him with a parent's care.

  Pisander follow'd; matchless in his art
  To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;
  No hand so sure of all the Emathian line,
  Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.

  The fourth by Phoenix' grave command was graced,
  Laerces' valiant offspring led the last.

  Soon as Achilles with superior care
  Had call'd the chiefs, and order'd all the war,
  This stern remembrance to his troops he gave:
  "Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
  Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,
  Think what reproach these ears endured so long;
  'Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,
  While restless, raging, in your ships you lay)
  Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield;
  Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:
  If that dire fury must for ever burn,
  What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!'
  Such were your words--Now, warriors! grieve no more,
  Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
  This day shall give you all your soul demands,
  Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!"

                          [Illustration: DIANA.]

                                  DIANA.


  Thus while he roused the fire in every breast,
  Close and more close the listening cohorts press'd;
  Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring
  Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.
  As when a circling wall the builder forms,
  Of strength defensive against wind and storms,
  Compacted stones the thickening work compose,
  And round him wide the rising structure grows:
  So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,
  Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along;
  Thick, undistinguish'd plumes, together join'd,
  Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.

  Far o'er the rest in glittering pomp appear,
  There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;
  Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired;
  Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.

  But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
  To the rich coffer in his shady tent;
  There lay on heaps his various garments roll'd,
  And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold,
  (The presents of the silver-footed dame)
  From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame,
  Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,
  Nor raised in offerings to the power divine,
  But Peleus' son; and Peleus' son to none
  Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone.
  This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame,
  He purged; and wash'd it in the running stream.
  Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space
  His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place
  Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pour'd
  Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored:

  "O thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
  O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
  Who 'midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,
  Presid'st on bleak Dodona's vocal hill:
  (Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,
  Their feet unwash'd, their slumbers on the ground;
  Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees;
  And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;)
  Hear, as of old! Thou gav'st, at Thetis' prayer,
  Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair.
  Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field
  The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield,
  Though still determined, to my ships confined;
  Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
  Oh! be his guard thy providential care,
  Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war:
  Press'd by his single force let Hector see
  His fame in arms not owing all to me.
  But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire,
  Let him with conquest and renown retire;
  Preserve his arms, preserve his social train,
  And safe return him to these eyes again!"

  Great Jove consents to half the chief's request,
  But heaven's eternal doom denies the rest;
  To free the fleet was granted to his prayer;
  His safe return, the winds dispersed in air.
  Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies,
  And waits the combat with impatient eyes.

  Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclus' care,
  Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
  As wasps, provoked by children in their play,
  Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,
  In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,
  Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage:
  All rise in arms, and, with a general cry,
  Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny.
  Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,
  So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms:
  Their rising rage Patroclus' breath inspires,
  Who thus inflames them with heroic fires:

  "O warriors, partners of Achilles' praise!
  Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days;
  Your godlike master let your acts proclaim,
  And add new glories to his mighty name.
  Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave,
  And humble the proud monarch whom you save."

  Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke,
  Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.
  From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound,
  The hollow ships return a deeper sound.
  The war stood still, and all around them gazed,
  When great Achilles' shining armour blazed:
  Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,
  At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.

  Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
  Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
  Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore
  Unbless'd Protesilaus to Ilion's shore,
  The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood;
  (Who led his bands from Axius' winding flood;)
  His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;
  The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
  His troops, that see their country's glory slain,
  Fly diverse, scatter'd o'er the distant plain.
  Patroclus' arm forbids the spreading fires,
  And from the half-burn'd ship proud Troy retires;
  Clear'd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
  In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
  Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
  And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
  So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain's head,
  O'er heaven's expanse like one black ceiling spread;
  Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
  Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
  The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
  And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
  The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
  And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

  But Troy repulsed, and scatter'd o'er the plains,
  Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
  Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
  But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
  As Areilycus had turn'd him round,
  Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
  The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
  The thigh transfix'd, and broke the brittle bone:
  Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
  Thy breast, unarm'd, received the Spartan lance.
  Phylides' dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
  His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,
  Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away;
  In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.

  In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand,
  And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:
  By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies,
  Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies,
  Kind Maris, bleeding in his brother's wound,
  Defends the breathless carcase on the ground;
  Furious he flies, his murderer to engage:
  But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage,
  Between his arm and shoulder aims a blow;
  His arm falls spouting on the dust below:
  He sinks, with endless darkness cover'd o'er:
  And vents his soul, effused with gushing gore.

  Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed,
  Sarpedon's friends, Amisodarus' seed;
  Amisodarus, who, by Furies led,
  The bane of men, abhorr'd Chimaera bred;
  Skill'd in the dart in vain, his sons expire,
  And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire.

  Stopp'd in the tumult Cleobulus lies,
  Beneath Oileus' arm, a living prize;
  A living prize not long the Trojan stood;
  The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood:
  Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies;
  Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes.

  Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame,
  Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;
  In vain their javelins at each other flew,
  Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.
  On the plumed crest of his Boeotian foe
  The daring Lycon aim'd a noble blow;
  The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped
  Full on the juncture of the neck and head:
  The head, divided by a stroke so just,
  Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.

  O'ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds,
  Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground:
  His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.

  Next Erymas was doom'd his fate to feel,
  His open'd mouth received the Cretan steel:
  Beneath the brain the point a passage tore,
  Crash'd the thin bones, and drown'd the teeth in gore:
  His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood;
  He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.

  As when the flocks neglected by the swain,
  Or kids, or lambs, lie scatter'd o'er the plain,
  A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey,
  And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:
  Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came;
  Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.

  But still at Hector godlike Ajax aim'd,
  Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
  The Trojan chief, experienced in the field,
  O'er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield,
  Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,
  And on his buckler caught the ringing shower:
  He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,
  Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.

  As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,
  And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,
  Dark o'er the fields the ascending vapour flies,
  And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:
  So from the ships, along the dusky plain,
  Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
  Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray
  The fiery coursers forced their lord away:
  While far behind his Trojans fall confused;
  Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised:
  Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes
  Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
  In vain they labour up the steepy mound;
  Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
  Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
  Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
  Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
  Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch'd from sight.
  The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
  Scour o'er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
  Loud o'er the rout was heard the victor's cry,
  Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die,
  Where horse and arms, and chariots he o'erthrown,
  And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
  No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew:
  From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
  High-bounding o'er the fosse, the whirling car
  Smokes through the ranks, o'ertakes the flying war,
  And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
  Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies.
  Not with less noise, with less impetuous force,
  The tide of Trojans urge their desperate course,
  Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours,
  And earth is loaden with incessant showers;
  (When guilty mortals break the eternal laws,
  Or judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;)
  From their deep beds he bids the rivers rise,
  And opens all the flood-gates of the skies:
  The impetuous torrents from their hills obey,
  Whole fields are drown'd, and mountains swept away;
  Loud roars the deluge till it meets the main;
  And trembling man sees all his labours vain!

  And now the chief (the foremost troops repell'd)
  Back to the ships his destined progress held,
  Bore down half Troy in his resistless way,
  And forced the routed ranks to stand the day.
  Between the space where silver Simois flows,
  Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose,
  All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands,
  And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.
  First Pronous died beneath his fiery dart,
  Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.
  Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear,
  And fell the victim of his coward fear;
  Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye,
  Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly;
  Patroclus mark'd him as he shunn'd the war,
  And with unmanly tremblings shook the car,
  And dropp'd the flowing reins. Him 'twixt the jaws,
  The javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws.
  As on a rock that overhangs the main,
  An angler, studious of the line and cane,
  Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore:
  Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore
  The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook,
  He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.

  Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone,
  Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:
  Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew,
  And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:
  Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell,
  And death involved him with the shades of hell.
  Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
  Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
  Amphoterus and Erymas succeed;
  And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
  Where'er he moves, the growing slaughters spread
  In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.

  When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld
  Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,
  With this reproach his flying host he warms:
  "Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
  Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;
  This hand unaided shall the war sustain:
  The task be mine this hero's strength to try,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly."

  He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:
  Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
  As when two vultures on the mountain's height
  Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight;
  They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry;
  The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:
  The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage
  With equal clamours, and with equal rage.

  Jove view'd the combat: whose event foreseen,
  He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:
  "The hour draws on; the destinies ordain,(245)
  My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain:
  Already on the verge of death he stands,
  His life is owed to fierce Patroclus' hands,
  What passions in a parent's breast debate!
  Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate,
  And send him safe to Lycia, distant far
  From all the dangers and the toils of war;
  Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield,
  And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?"

  Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes:
  "What words are these, O sovereign of the skies!
  Short is the date prescribed to mortal man;
  Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span,
  Whose bounds were fix'd before his race began?
  How many sons of gods, foredoom'd to death,
  Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!
  Were thine exempt, debate would rise above,
  And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.
  Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight;
  And when the ascending soul has wing'd her flight,
  Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command,
  The breathless body to his native land.
  His friends and people, to his future praise,
  A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise,
  And lasting honours to his ashes give;
  His fame ('tis all the dead can have) shall live."

  She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,
  Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
  Then touch'd with grief, the weeping heavens distill'd
  A shower of blood o'er all the fatal field:
  The god, his eyes averting from the plain,
  Laments his son, predestined to be slain,
  Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
  Now met in arms, the combatants appear;
  Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;
  From strong Patroclus' hand the javelin fled,
  And pass'd the groin of valiant Thrasymed;
  The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain,
  He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
  Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw:
  The first aloof with erring fury flew,
  The next transpierced Achilles' mortal steed,
  The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:
  Fix'd in the shoulder's joint, he reel'd around,
  Roll'd in the bloody dust, and paw'd the slippery ground.
  His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;
  Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook:
  When bold Automedon, to disengage
  The starting coursers, and restrain their rage,
  Divides the traces with his sword, and freed
  The encumbered chariot from the dying steed:
  The rest move on, obedient to the rein:
  The car rolls slowly o'er the dusty plain.

  The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance:
  And first Sarpedon whirl'd his weighty lance,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its dying force.
  Not so Patroclus' never-erring dart;
  Aim'd at his breast it pierced a mortal part,
  Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
  Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)
  Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound
  It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground,
  Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine,
  Before his chariot stretch'd his form divine:
  He grasp'd the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
  And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore.
  So lies a bull beneath the lion's paws,
  While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws
  The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood;
  Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.

  Then to the leader of the Lycian band
  The dying chief address'd his last command;
  "Glaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare
  The glorious dangers of destructive war,
  To lead my troops, to combat at their head,
  Incite the living, and supply the dead.
  Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath
  Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedon's death.
  What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo,
  If these spoil'd arms adorn a Grecian foe!
  Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight;
  Defend my body, conquer in my right:
  That, taught by great examples, all may try
  Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die."
  He ceased; the Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
  And his eyes darken'd with the shades of death.
  The insulting victor with disdain bestrode
  The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod;
  Then drew the weapon from his panting heart,
  The reeking fibres clinging to the dart;
  From the wide wound gush'd out a stream of blood,
  And the soul issued in the purple flood.
  His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain,
  Unguided now, their mighty master slain.
  All-impotent of aid, transfix'd with grief,
  Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief:
  His painful arm, yet useless with the smart
  Inflicted late by Teucer's deadly dart,
  Supported on his better hand he stay'd:
  To Phoebus then ('twas all he could) he pray'd:

  "All-seeing monarch! whether Lycia's coast,
  Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast,
  Powerful alike to ease the wretch's smart;
  O hear me! god of every healing art!
  Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,
  That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein,
  I stand unable to sustain the spear,
  And sigh, at distance from the glorious war.
  Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid,
  Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid;
  But thou, O god of health! thy succour lend,
  To guard the relics of my slaughter'd friend:
  For thou, though distant, canst restore my might,
  To head my Lycians, and support the fight."

  Apollo heard; and, suppliant as he stood,
  His heavenly hand restrain'd the flux of blood;
  He drew the dolours from the wounded part,
  And breathed a spirit in his rising heart.
  Renew'd by art divine, the hero stands,
  And owns the assistance of immortal hands.
  First to the fight his native troops he warms,
  Then loudly calls on Troy's vindictive arms;
  With ample strides he stalks from place to place;
  Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas:
  Ãneas next, and Hector he accosts;
  Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts.

  "What thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?
  Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy!
  Those generous friends, who, from their country far,
  Breathe their brave souls out in another's war.
  See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies,
  In action valiant, and in council wise,
  Who guarded right, and kept his people free;
  To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
  Stretch'd by Patroclus' arm on yonder plains,
  O save from hostile rage his loved remains!
  Ah let not Greece his conquer'd trophies boast,
  Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!"

  He spoke: each leader in his grief partook:
  Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook.
  Transfix'd with deep regret, they view o'erthrown
  At once his country's pillar, and their own;
  A chief, who led to Troy's beleaguer'd wall
  A host of heroes, and outshined them all.
  Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes,
  And with superior vengeance greatly glows.

  But o'er the dead the fierce Patroclus stands,
  And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands:

  "Heroes, be men; be what you were before;
  Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
  The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield,
  Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
  To guard his body Troy in numbers flies;
  Tis half the glory to maintain our prize.
  Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
  And send the living Lycians to the dead."

  The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
  The martial squadrons close on either hand:
  Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
  Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
  With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
  The clash of armour rings o'er all the plain.
  Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
  O'er the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
  And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
  His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

  Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
  Agacleus' son, from Budium's lofty walls;
  Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
  To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
  Now sent to Troy, Achilles' arms to aid,
  He pays due vengeance to his kinsman's shade.
  Soon as his luckless hand had touch'd the dead,
  A rock's large fragment thunder'd on his head;
  Hurl'd by Hectorean force it cleft in twain
  His shatter'd helm, and stretch'd him o'er the slain.

  Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came,
  And, like an eagle darting at his game,
  Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
  What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,
  O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,
  At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone,
  Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
  That arm, drew back; and Hector learn'd to fear.
  Far as an able hand a lance can throw,
  Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe;
  So far the Trojans from their lines retired;
  Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
  Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,
  The only hope of Chalcon's trembling age;
  Wide o'er the land was stretch'd his large domain,
  With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:
  Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue
  The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;
  Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound,
  He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
  The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;
  With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain,
  And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose;
  An iron circle round the carcase grows.

  Then brave Laogonus resign'd his breath,
  Despatch'd by Merion to the shades of death:
  On Ida's holy hill he made abode,
  The priest of Jove, and honour'd like his god.
  Between the jaw and ear the javelin went;
  The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
  His spear Aeneas at the victor threw,
  Who stooping forward from the death withdrew;
  The lance hiss'd harmless o'er his covering shield,
  And trembling struck, and rooted in the field;
  There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain,
  Sent by the great Aeneas' arm in vain.
  "Swift as thou art (the raging hero cries)
  And skill'd in dancing to dispute the prize,
  My spear, the destined passage had it found,
  Had fix'd thy active vigour to the ground."

  "O valiant leader of the Dardan host!
  (Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)
  Strong as you are, 'tis mortal force you trust,
  An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
  And if to this my lance thy fate be given,
  Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven:
  This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto's coast;
  Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost."

  "O friend (Menoetius' son this answer gave)
  With words to combat, ill befits the brave;
  Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel,
  Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
  To speak, beseems the council; but to dare
  In glorious action, is the task of war."

  This said, Patroclus to the battle flies;
  Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:
  Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close;
  And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
  As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,
  The labours of the woodman's axe resound;
  Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,
  While crackling forests fall on every side:
  Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,
  So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.

  Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,
  His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,
  And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed,
  Lies undistinguish'd from the vulgar dead.
  His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose,
  On every side the busy combat grows;
  Thick as beneath some shepherd's thatch'd abode
  (The pails high foaming with a milky flood)
  The buzzing flies, a persevering train,
  Incessant swarm, and chased return again.

  Jove view'd the combat with a stern survey,
  And eyes that flash'd intolerable day.
  Fix'd on the field his sight, his breast debates
  The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
  Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call
  The force of Hector to Patroclus' fall,
  This instant see his short-lived trophies won,
  And stretch him breathless on his slaughter'd son;
  Or yet, with many a soul's untimely flight,
  Augment the fame and horror of the fight.
  To crown Achilles' valiant friend with praise
  At length he dooms; and, that his last of days
  Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe;
  Nor unattended see the shades below.
  Then Hector's mind he fills with dire dismay;
  He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away;
  Sunk with Troy's heavy fates, he sees decline
  The scales of Jove, and pants with awe divine.

  Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,
  And left their monarch with the common dead:
  Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall
  Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall.
  (So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain
  The prize contested, and despoil the slain.
  The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne;
  Patroclus' ships the glorious spoils adorn.

  Then thus to Phoebus, in the realms above,
  Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove:
  "Descend, my Phoebus! on the Phrygian plain,
  And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain;
  Then bathe his body in the crystal flood,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with blood;
  O'er all his limbs ambrosial odours shed,
  And with celestial robes adorn the dead.
  Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath
  To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death.
  They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear;
  His friends a tomb and pyramid shall rear:
  What honour mortals after death receive,
  Those unavailing honours we may give!"

 [Illustration: SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.]

         SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.


  Apollo bows, and from mount Ida's height,
  Swift to the field precipitates his flight;
  Thence from the war the breathless hero bore,
  Veil'd in a cloud, to silver Simois' shore;
  There bathed his honourable wounds, and dress'd
  His manly members in the immortal vest;
  And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
  Restores his freshness, and his form renews.
  Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race,
  Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,
  Received Sarpedon, at the god's command,
  And in a moment reach'd the Lycian land;
  The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
  Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

  Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
  With foaming coursers, and with loosen'd reins.
  Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
  Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew
  Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
  Vain was thy friend's command, thy courage vain.
  For he, the god, whose counsels uncontroll'd
  Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold;
  The god who gives, resumes, and orders all,
  He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.

  Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain,
  Who last beneath thy vengeance press'd the plain;
  When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,
  And call'd to fill the number of the dead?
  Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;
  Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds,
  Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;
  The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crown'd:
  Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;
  The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.

  Now Troy had stoop'd beneath his matchless power,
  But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred tower
  Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;(246)
  His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook;
  He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "Patroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall
  Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;
  Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
  Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles' hand."

  So spoke the god who darts celestial fires;
  The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires.
  While Hector, checking at the Scaean gates
  His panting coursers, in his breast debates,
  Or in the field his forces to employ,
  Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy.
  Thus while he thought, beside him Phoebus stood,
  In Asius' shape, who reigned by Sangar's flood;
  (Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung,
  A valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;)
  Thus he accosts him. "What a shameful sight!
  God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?
  Were thine my vigour this successful spear
  Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
  Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame,
  And in Patroclus' blood efface thy shame.
  Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed,
  And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed."

  So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,
  And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
  He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;
  The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
  The god the Grecians' sinking souls depress'd,
  And pour'd swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
  Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;
  A spear his left, a stone employs his right:
  With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  The falling ruin crush'd Cebrion's head,
  The lawless offspring of king Priam's bed;
  His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguish'd wound:
  The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
  The charioteer, while yet he held the rein,
  Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
  To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,
  While the proud victor thus his fall derides.

  "Good heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!
  What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
  Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
  Pity that all their practice is by land!"

  Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize,
  To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:
  Swift as a lion, terrible and bold,
  That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;
  Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,
  And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
  At once bold Hector leaping from his car,
  Defends the body, and provokes the war.
  Thus for some slaughter'd hind, with equal rage,
  Two lordly rulers of the wood engage;
  Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,
  And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
  Stern Hector fastens on the warrior's head,
  And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead:
  While all around, confusion, rage, and fright,
  Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.
  So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud
  In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood;
  Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown,
  The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;
  This way and that, the rattling thicket bends,
  And the whole forest in one crash descends.
  Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage,
  In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
  Darts shower'd on darts, now round the carcase ring;
  Now flights of arrows bounding from the string:
  Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields,
  Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.
  But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains,
  Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains,
  And, stretch'd in death, forgets the guiding reins!

  Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven
  His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven;
  While on each host with equal tempests fell
  The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.
  But when his evening wheels o'erhung the main,
  Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.
  Then from amidst the tumult and alarms,
  They draw the conquer'd corse and radiant arms.
  Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows,
  And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
  Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew,
  And thrice three heroes at each onset slew.
  There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine
  The last, black remnant of so bright a line:
  Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;
  Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day!

  For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined,
  Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
  The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel;
  His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn'd senses reel
  In giddy darkness; far to distance flung,
  His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
  Achilles' plume is stain'd with dust and gore;
  That plume which never stoop'd to earth before;
  Long used, untouch'd, in fighting fields to shine,
  And shade the temples of the mad divine.
  Jove dooms it now on Hector's helm to nod;
  Not long--for fate pursues him, and the god.

  His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
  Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
  The corslet his astonish'd breast forsakes:
  Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
  Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
  Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

  A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
  From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
  Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
  Skill'd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
  Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
  While yet he learn'd his rudiments of war.
  His venturous spear first drew the hero's gore;
  He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
  Nor, though disarm'd, Patroclus' fury stood:
  But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
  And turn'd him short, and herded in the crowd.
  Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
  Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
  Retires for succour to his social train,
  And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
  Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
  Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
  The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
  He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
  With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
  Her yet-surviving heroes seem'd to fall.
  So, scorch'd with heat, along the desert score,
  The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
  Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,
  With flaming eyes, and jaws besmear'd with blood;
  At length the sovereign savage wins the strife;
  And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
  Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o'erthrown,
  So many lives effused, expires his own.
  As dying now at Hector's feet he lies,
  He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:

  "Lie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy
  Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
  The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames,
  And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames.
  Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free,
  And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee:
  But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made;
  Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid;
  Though much at parting that great chief might say,
  And much enjoin thee, this important day.

  'Return not, my brave friend (perhaps he said),
  Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.'
  He spoke, Patroclus march'd, and thus he sped."

  Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies,
  With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies:

  "Vain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine!
  Jove's and Apollo's is this deed, not thine;
  To heaven is owed whate'er your own you call,
  And heaven itself disarm'd me ere my fall.
  Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might,
  Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight:
  By fate and Phoebus was I first o'erthrown,
  Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own.
  But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath;
  The gods inspire it, and it sounds thy death:
  Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I;
  Black fate o'erhangs thee, and thy hour draws nigh;
  Even now on life's last verge I see thee stand,
  I see thee fall, and by Achilles' hand."

  He faints: the soul unwilling wings her way,
  (The beauteous body left a load of clay)
  Flits to the lone, uncomfortable coast;
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed
  On the pale carcase, thus address'd the dead:

  "From whence this boding speech, the stern decree
  Of death denounced, or why denounced to me?
  Why not as well Achilles' fate be given
  To Hector's lance? Who knows the will of heaven?"

  Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay
  His breathless bosom, tore the lance away;
  And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear
  He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer.
  But swift Automedon with loosen'd reins
  Rapt in the chariot o'er the distant plains,
  Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;
  The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove.

                       [Illustration: ÃSCULAPIUS.]

                               ÃSCULAPIUS.





BOOK XVII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.--THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.

Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy:
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus retires;
but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This, Glaucus objects to
Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had won from
Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till Ajax rallies
them: Aeneas sustains the Trojans. Aeneas and Hector Attempt the chariot
of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The horses of Achilles
deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with a thick
darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. Menelaus sends
Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclus' death: then returns to
the fight, where, though attacked with the utmost fury, he and Meriones,
assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body to the ships.

The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies in
the fields before Troy.

  On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread,
  Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
  Great Menelaus, touch'd with generous woe,
  Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
  Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,
  Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves;
  And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare)
  Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother's care,
  Opposed to each that near the carcase came,
  His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.

  The son of Panthus, skill'd the dart to send,
  Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.
  "This hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
  Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:
  To me the spoils my prowess won, resign:
  Depart with life, and leave the glory mine"

  The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burn'd
  With generous anguish, and in scorn return'd:
  "Laugh'st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne,
  When mortals boast of prowess not their own?
  Not thus the lion glories in his might,
  Nor panther braves his spotted foe in fight,
  Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the plain;)
  Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain.
  But far the vainest of the boastful kind,
  These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
  Yet 'twas but late, beneath my conquering steel
  This boaster's brother, Hyperenor, fell;
  Against our arm which rashly he defied,
  Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
  These eyes beheld him on the dust expire,
  No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire.
  Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,
  Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom;
  Or, while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
  Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

  Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: "That action known,
  Come, for my brother's blood repay thy own.
  His weeping father claims thy destined head,
  And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
  On these thy conquer'd spoils I shall bestow,
  To soothe a consort's and a parent's woe.
  No longer then defer the glorious strife,
  Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life."

  Swift as the word the missile lance he flings;
  The well-aim'd weapon on the buckler rings,
  But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
  On Jove the father great Atrides calls,
  Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,
  It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain;
  Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,
  Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound.
  The shining circlets of his golden hair,
  Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
  Instarr'd with gems and gold, bestrow the shore,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with gore.

  As the young olive, in some sylvan scene,
  Crown'd by fresh fountains with eternal green,
  Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair,
  And plays and dances to the gentle air;
  When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades
  The tender plant, and withers all its shades;
  It lies uprooted from its genial bed,
  A lovely ruin now defaced and dead:
  Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
  While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away.
  Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,
  Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies:
  Flies, as before some mountain lion's ire
  The village curs and trembling swains retire,
  When o'er the slaughter'd bull they hear him roar,
  And see his jaws distil with smoking gore:
  All pale with fear, at distance scatter'd round,
  They shout incessant, and the vales resound.

  Meanwhile Apollo view'd with envious eyes,
  And urged great Hector to dispute the prize;
  (In Mentes' shape, beneath whose martial care
  The rough Ciconians learn'd the trade of war;)(247)
  "Forbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase
  Achilles' coursers, of ethereal race;
  They stoop not, these, to mortal man's command,
  Or stoop to none but great Achilles' hand.
  Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,
  Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain;
  By Sparta slain! for ever now suppress'd
  The fire which burn'd in that undaunted breast!"

  Thus having spoke, Apollo wing'd his flight,
  And mix'd with mortals in the toils of fight:
  His words infix'd unutterable care
  Deep in great Hector's soul: through all the war
  He darts his anxious eye; and, instant, view'd
  The breathless hero in his blood imbued,
  (Forth welling from the wound, as prone he lay)
  And in the victor's hands the shining prey.
  Sheath'd in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies,
  And sends his voice in thunder to the skies:
  Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent,
  It flew, and fired the nations as it went.
  Atrides from the voice the storm divined,
  And thus explored his own unconquer'd mind:

  "Then shall I quit Patroclus on the plain,
  Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain!
  Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?
  Or singly, Hector and his troops attend?
  Sure where such partial favour heaven bestow'd,
  To brave the hero were to brave the god:
  Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the field;
  'Tis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield.
  Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear,
  Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear:
  Still would we turn, still battle on the plains,
  And give Achilles all that yet remains
  Of his and our Patroclus--" This, no more
  The time allow'd: Troy thicken'd on the shore.
  A sable scene! The terrors Hector led.
  Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead.

  So from the fold the unwilling lion parts,
  Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts;
  He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,
  With heart indignant and retorted eyes.
  Now enter'd in the Spartan ranks, he turn'd
  His manly breast, and with new fury burn'd;
  O'er all the black battalions sent his view,
  And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew;
  Where labouring on the left the warrior stood,
  All grim in arms, and cover'd o'er with blood;
  There breathing courage, where the god of day
  Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.

  To him the king: "Oh Ajax, oh my friend!
  Haste, and Patroclus' loved remains defend:
  The body to Achilles to restore
  Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
  For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies;
  And Hector glories in the dazzling prize."
  He said, and touch'd his heart. The raging pair
  Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
  Already had stern Hector seized his head,
  And doom'd to Trojan gods the unhappy dead;
  But soon as Ajax rear'd his tower-like shield,
  Sprung to his car, and measured back the field,
  His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,
  To stand a trophy of his fame in war.

  Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield display'd)
  Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;
  And now before, and now behind he stood:
  Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
  With many a step, the lioness surrounds
  Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
  Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
  Dark o'er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
  Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows
  With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.

  But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,
  On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids:

  "Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
  A manly form, without a manly mind.
  Is this, O chief! a hero's boasted fame?
  How vain, without the merit, is the name!
  Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ
  What other methods may preserve thy Troy:
  'Tis time to try if Ilion's state can stand
  By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand:
  Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake
  Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
  What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
  Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect;
  Say, shall our slaughter'd bodies guard your walls,
  While unreveng'd the great Sarpedon falls?
  Even where he died for Troy, you left him there,
  A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air.
  On my command if any Lycian wait,
  Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate.
  Did such a spirit as the gods impart
  Impel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart,
  (Such as should burn in every soul that draws
  The sword for glory, and his country's cause)
  Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,
  And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy.
  Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
  Sarpedon's arms and honour'd corse again!
  Greece with Achilles' friend should be repaid,
  And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
  But words are vain--Let Ajax once appear,
  And Hector trembles and recedes with fear;
  Thou dar'st not meet the terrors of his eye;
  And lo! already thou prepar'st to fly."

  The Trojan chief with fix'd resentment eyed
  The Lycian leader, and sedate replied:

  "Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector's ear
  From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
  I deem'd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
  But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
  I shun great Ajax? I desert my train?
  'Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;
  I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds,
  And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
  But Jove's high will is ever uncontroll'd,
  The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;
  Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now
  Strikes the fresh garland from the victor's brow!
  Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,
  And thou be witness, if I fear to-day;
  If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,
  Or yet their hero dare defend the dead."

  Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
  Be men, my friends, in action as in name,
  And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.
  Hector in proud Achilles' arms shall shine,
  Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine."

  He strode along the field, as thus he said:
  (The sable plumage nodded o'er his head:)
  Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look;
  One instant saw, one instant overtook
  The distant band, that on the sandy shore
  The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
  There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow'd;
  His train to Troy convey'd the massy load.
  Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;
  The work and present of celestial hands;
  By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
  As first to Peleus by the court of heaven:
  His father's arms not long Achilles wears,
  Forbid by fate to reach his father's years.

  Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar,
  The god whose thunder rends the troubled air
  Beheld with pity; as apart he sat,
  And, conscious, look'd through all the scene of fate.
  He shook the sacred honours of his head;
  Olympus trembled, and the godhead said;
  "Ah, wretched man! unmindful of thy end!
  A moment's glory; and what fates attend!
  In heavenly panoply divinely bright
  Thou stand'st, and armies tremble at thy sight,
  As at Achilles' self! beneath thy dart
  Lies slain the great Achilles' dearer part.
  Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn,
  Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
  Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day,
  A blaze of glory ere thou fad'st away.
  For ah! no more Andromache shall come
  With joyful tears to welcome Hector home;
  No more officious, with endearing charms,
  From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides' arms!"

  Then with his sable brow he gave the nod
  That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
  The stubborn arms (by Jove's command disposed)
  Conform'd spontaneous, and around him closed:
  Fill'd with the god, enlarged his members grew,
  Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew,
  The blood in brisker tides began to roll,
  And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
  Exhorting loud through all the field he strode,
  And look'd, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
  Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires,
  Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
  The great Thersilochus like fury found,
  Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,
  And Ennomus, in augury renown'd.

  "Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber'd bands
  Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
  'Twas not for state we summon'd you so far,
  To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war:
  Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,
  To save our present, and our future race.
  Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy,
  And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
  Now then, to conquer or to die prepare;
  To die or conquer are the terms of war.
  Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain,
  Whoe'er shall drag him to the Trojan train,
  With Hector's self shall equal honours claim;
  With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame."

  Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears,
  They join, they thicken, they protend their spears;
  Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,
  And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey:
  Vain hope! what numbers shall the field o'erspread,
  What victims perish round the mighty dead!

  Great Ajax mark'd the growing storm from far,
  And thus bespoke his brother of the war:
  "Our fatal day, alas! is come, my friend;
  And all our wars and glories at an end!
  'Tis not this corse alone we guard in vain,
  Condemn'd to vultures on the Trojan plain;
  We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall
  On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.
  See what a tempest direful Hector spreads,
  And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!
  Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call,
  The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all."

  The warrior raised his voice, and wide around
  The field re-echoed the distressful sound.
  "O chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is given
  The rule of men; whose glory is from heaven!
  Whom with due honours both Atrides grace:
  Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race!
  All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far,
  All, whom I see not through this cloud of war;
  Come all! let generous rage your arms employ,
  And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy."

  Oilean Ajax first the voice obey'd,
  Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid:
  Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age,
  And Merion, burning with a hero's rage.
  The long-succeeding numbers who can name?
  But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame.
  Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng;
  Whole Troy embodied rush'd with shouts along.
  Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves,
  Where some swoln river disembogues his waves,
  Full in the mouth is stopp'd the rushing tide,
  The boiling ocean works from side to side,
  The river trembles to his utmost shore,
  And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.

  Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band
  With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
  Jove, pouring darkness o'er the mingled fight,
  Conceals the warriors' shining helms in night:
  To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend
  Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:
  Dead he protects him with superior care.
  Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.

             [Illustration: FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.]

                     FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.


  The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
  Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
  Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
  By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
  (Ajax to Peleus' son the second name,
  In graceful stature next, and next in fame)
  With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
  So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
  And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
  The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
  The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' heir,
  Hippothous, dragg'd the carcase through the war;
  The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound:
  Inevitable fate o'ertakes the deed;
  Doom'd by great Ajax' vengeful lance to bleed:
  It cleft the helmet's brazen cheeks in twain;
  The shatter'd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
  With nerves relax'd he tumbles to the ground:
  The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
  He drops Patroclus' foot, and o'er him spread,
  Now lies a sad companion of the dead:
  Far from Larissa lies, his native air,
  And ill requites his parents' tender care.
  Lamented youth! in life's first bloom he fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

  Once more at Ajax Hector's javelin flies;
  The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,
  Shunn'd the descending death; which hissing on,
  Stretch'd in the dust the great Iphytus' son,
  Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind
  The boldest warrior and the noblest mind:
  In little Panope, for strength renown'd,
  He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
  Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,
  And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood;
  In clanging arms the hero fell and all
  The fields resounded with his weighty fall.

  Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
  The Telamonian lance his belly rends;
  The hollow armour burst before the stroke,
  And through the wound the rushing entrails broke:
  In strong convulsions panting on the sands
  He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.

  Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train:
  The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.
  And now had Troy, by Greece compell'd to yield,
  Fled to her ramparts, and resign'd the field;
  Greece, in her native fortitude elate,
  With Jove averse, had turn'd the scale of fate:
  But Phoebus urged Ãneas to the fight;
  He seem'd like aged Periphas to sight:
  (A herald in Anchises' love grown old,
  Revered for prudence, and with prudence bold.)

  Thus he--"What methods yet, O chief! remain,
  To save your Troy, though heaven its fall ordain?
  There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care,
  By valour, numbers, and by arts of war,
  Have forced the powers to spare a sinking state,
  And gain'd at length the glorious odds of fate:
  But you, when fortune smiles, when Jove declares
  His partial favour, and assists your wars,
  Your shameful efforts 'gainst yourselves employ,
  And force the unwilling god to ruin Troy."

  Ãneas through the form assumed descries
  The power conceal'd, and thus to Hector cries:
  "Oh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,
  We seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
  A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,
  And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms."

  He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:
  The bold example all his hosts pursue.
  Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
  In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
  Who view'd his fall, and, grieving at the chance,
  Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;
  The whirling lance, with vigorous force address'd,
  Descends, and pants in Apisaon's breast;
  From rich Paeonia's vales the warrior came,
  Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
  Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,
  And rush'd to combat, but he rush'd in vain:
  Indissolubly firm, around the dead,
  Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread,
  And hemm'd with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,
  A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
  Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,
  And in an orb contracts the crowded war,
  Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,
  And stands the centre and the soul of all:
  Fix'd on the spot they war, and wounded, wound
  A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:
  On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled,
  And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.

  Greece, in close order, and collected might,
  Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight;
  Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,
  And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
  In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;
  The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host
  Seem'd as extinct: day ravish'd from their eyes,
  And all heaven's splendours blotted from the skies.
  Such o'er Patroclus' body hung the night,
  The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;
  Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread,
  No vapour rested on the mountain's head,
  The golden sun pour'd forth a stronger ray,
  And all the broad expansion flamed with day.
  Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight,
  And here and there their scatter'd arrows light:
  But death and darkness o'er the carcase spread,
  There burn'd the war, and there the mighty bled.

  Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear,
  (Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear,
  And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command,
  When from the ships he sent the Pylian band.
  The youthful brothers thus for fame contend,
  Nor knew the fortune of Achilles' friend;
  In thought they view'd him still, with martial joy,
  Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.

  But round the corse the heroes pant for breath,
  And thick and heavy grows the work of death:
  O'erlabour'd now, with dust, and sweat, and gore,
  Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered o'er;
  Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise,
  And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.
  As when a slaughter'd bull's yet reeking hide,
  Strain'd with full force, and tugg'd from side to side,
  The brawny curriers stretch; and labour o'er
  The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore:
  So tugging round the corse both armies stood;
  The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood;
  While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ,
  Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy.
  Not Pallas' self, her breast when fury warms,
  Nor he whose anger sets the world in arms,
  Could blame this scene; such rage, such horror reign'd;
  Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordain'd.

  Achilles in his ships at distance lay,
  Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day;
  He, yet unconscious of Patroclus' fall,
  In dust extended under Ilion's wall,
  Expects him glorious from the conquered plain,
  And for his wish'd return prepares in vain;
  Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend
  Was more than heaven had destined to his friend.
  Perhaps to him: this Thetis had reveal'd;
  The rest, in pity to her son, conceal'd.

  Still raged the conflict round the hero dead,
  And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled.
  "Cursed be the man (even private Greeks would say)
  Who dares desert this well-disputed day!
  First may the cleaving earth before our eyes
  Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice;
  First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast
  We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!"

  Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said,
  "Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!"

  Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise,
  And shake the brazen concave of the skies.

  Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,
  The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood:
  Their godlike master slain before their eyes,
  They wept, and shared in human miseries.(248)
  In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,
  Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;
  Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go,
  Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:
  Still as a tombstone, never to be moved,
  On some good man or woman unreproved
  Lays its eternal weight; or fix'd, as stands
  A marble courser by the sculptor's hands,
  Placed on the hero's grave. Along their face
  The big round drops coursed down with silent pace,
  Conglobing on the dust. Their manes, that late
  Circled their arched necks, and waved in state,
  Trail'd on the dust beneath the yoke were spread,
  And prone to earth was hung their languid head:
  Nor Jove disdain'd to cast a pitying look,
  While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke:

  "Unhappy coursers of immortal strain,
  Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain;
  Did we your race on mortal man bestow,
  Only, alas! to share in mortal woe?
  For ah! what is there of inferior birth,
  That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
  What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
  Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
  A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
  For not by you shall Priam's son be borne
  High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
  He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
  Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
  Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
  Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
  Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
  For yet 'tis given to Troy to ravage o'er
  The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
  The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
  With sacred darkness shades the face of all."

  He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
  Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
  From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
  The kindling chariot through the parted war:
  So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
  Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
  From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
  And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
  Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
  Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
  Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress'd,
  Approach'd the chariot, and the chief address'd:

  "What god provokes thee rashly thus to dare,
  Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
  Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields
  Achilles' arms triumphant in the fields."

  "In happy time (the charioteer replies)
  The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes;
  No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains,
  Or holds their fury in suspended reins:
  Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame,
  But now Patroclus is an empty name!
  To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign
  The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine."

  He said. Alcimedon, with active heat,
  Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
  His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,
  And call'd Ãneas fighting near his side.

  "Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,
  Achilles' car, deserted of its lord!
  The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,
  Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
  Can such opponents stand when we assail?
  Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail."

  The son of Venus to the counsel yields;
  Then o'er their backs they spread their solid shields:
  With brass refulgent the broad surface shined,
  And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.
  Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds;
  Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds:
  In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn,
  In vain advance! not fated to return.

  Unmov'd, Automedon attends the fight,
  Implores the Eternal, and collects his might.
  Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind:
  "Oh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
  Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow,
  For hard the fight, determined is the foe;
  'Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize,
  War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies."

  Then through the field he sends his voice aloud,
  And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,
  With great Atrides. "Hither turn, (he said,)
  Turn where distress demands immediate aid;
  The dead, encircled by his friends, forego,
  And save the living from a fiercer foe.
  Unhelp'd we stand, unequal to engage
  The force of Hector, and Ãneas' rage:
  Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove
  Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove."

  He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung,
  Which pass'd the shield of Aretus the young:
  It pierced his belt, emboss'd with curious art,
  Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
  As when a ponderous axe, descending full,
  Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:(249)
  Struck 'twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,
  Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground:
  Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,
  And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.

  Now at Automedon the Trojan foe
  Discharged his lance; the meditated blow,
  Stooping, he shunn'd; the javelin idly fled,
  And hiss'd innoxious o'er the hero's head;
  Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear
  In long vibrations spent its fury there.
  With clashing falchions now the chiefs had closed,
  But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed;
  Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,
  But left their slain companion in his blood:
  His arms Automedon divests, and cries,
  "Accept, Patroclus, this mean sacrifice:
  Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid,
  Poor as it is, some offering to thy shade."

  So looks the lion o'er a mangled boar,
  All grim with rage, and horrible with gore;
  High on the chariot at one bound he sprung,
  And o'er his seat the bloody trophies hung.

  And now Minerva from the realms of air
  Descends impetuous, and renews the war;
  For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid,
  The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.
  As when high Jove denouncing future woe,
  O'er the dark clouds extends his purple bow,
  (In sign of tempests from the troubled air,
  Or from the rage of man, destructive war,)
  The drooping cattle dread the impending skies,
  And from his half-till'd field the labourer flies:
  In such a form the goddess round her drew
  A livid cloud, and to the battle flew.
  Assuming Phoenix' shape on earth she falls,
  And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls:
  "And lies Achilles' friend, beloved by all,
  A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall?
  What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell,
  To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!"
  "O chief, O father! (Atreus' son replies)
  O full of days! by long experience wise!
  What more desires my soul, than here unmoved
  To guard the body of the man I loved?
  Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear
  This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!
  But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread,
  And Jove's own glories blaze around his head!"

  Pleased to be first of all the powers address'd,
  She breathes new vigour in her hero's breast,
  And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite,
  Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight.
  So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o'er),
  Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
  (Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
  Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
  Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
  And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

  There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
  Aetion's son, and Podes was his name:
  With riches honour'd, and with courage bless'd,
  By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
  Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
  And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
  Sudden at Hector's side Apollo stood,
  Like Phaenops, Asius' son, appear'd the god;
  (Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
  In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

  "Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
  What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
  Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
  A chief once thought no terror of the field?
  Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
  He bears victorious, while our army flies:
  By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
  The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!"
  This heard, o'er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
  Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

  But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
  That shaded Ide and all the subject field
  Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
  Involved the mount; the thunder roar'd aloud;
  The affrighted hills from their foundations nod,
  And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:
  At one regard of his all-seeing eye
  The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors fly.

  Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;
  For as the brave Boeotian turn'd his head
  To face the foe, Polydamas drew near,
  And razed his shoulder with a shorten'd spear:
  By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,
  Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain,
  Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.

  As Hector follow'd, Idomen address'd
  The flaming javelin to his manly breast;
  The brittle point before his corslet yields;
  Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields:
  High on his chariots the Cretan stood,
  The son of Priam whirl'd the massive wood.
  But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear
  Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer
  Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name,
  Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame.
  On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,
  Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe,
  But the brave squire the ready coursers brought,
  And with his life his master's safety bought.
  Between his cheek and ear the weapon went,
  The teeth it shatter'd, and the tongue it rent.
  Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain;
  His dying hand forgets the falling rein:
  This Merion reaches, bending from the car,
  And urges to desert the hopeless war:
  Idomeneus consents; the lash applies;
  And the swift chariot to the navy flies.

  Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried,
  And conquest shifting to the Trojan side,
  Turn'd by the hand of Jove. Then thus begun,
  To Atreus's seed, the godlike Telamon:

  "Alas! who sees not Jove's almighty hand
  Transfers the glory to the Trojan band?
  Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart,
  He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart:
  Not so our spears; incessant though they rain,
  He suffers every lance to fall in vain.
  Deserted of the god, yet let us try
  What human strength and prudence can supply;
  If yet this honour'd corse, in triumph borne,
  May glad the fleets that hope not our return,
  Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates,
  And still hear Hector thundering at their gates.
  Some hero too must be despatch'd to bear
  The mournful message to Pelides' ear;
  For sure he knows not, distant on the shore,
  His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
  But such a chief I spy not through the host:
  The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost
  In general darkness--Lord of earth and air!
  Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer:
  Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
  Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
  If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
  But let us perish in the face of day!"

  With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer
  The god relenting clear'd the clouded air;
  Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;
  The blaze of armour flash'd against the day.
  "Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;
  If yet Antilochus survives the fight,
  Let him to great Achilles' ear convey
  The fatal news"--Atrides hastes away.

  So turns the lion from the nightly fold,
  Though high in courage, and with hunger bold,
  Long gall'd by herdsmen, and long vex'd by hounds,
  Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
  The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
  And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
  Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
  Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
  So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
  With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
  The foe, he fear'd, might yet Patroclus gain,
  And much admonish'd, much adjured his train:

  "O guard these relics to your charge consign'd,
  And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
  How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
  The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
  He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
  In death a hero, as in life a friend!"

  So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
  And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
  As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
  Of all that wings the mid aerial sky,
  The sacred eagle, from his walks above
  Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
  Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
  Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
  Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
  Pass'd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
  Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
  Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

  To him the king: "Beloved of Jove! draw near,
  For sadder tidings never touch'd thy ear;
  Thy eyes have witness'd what a fatal turn!
  How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
  This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore
  Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
  Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell
  The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:
  He too may haste the naked corse to gain:
  The arms are Hector's, who despoil'd the slain."

  The youthful warrior heard with silent woe,
  From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:
  Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say
  What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
  To brave Laodocus his arms he flung,
  Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along;
  Then ran the mournful message to impart,
  With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart.

  Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands
  (Though sore distress'd) to aid the Pylian bands;
  But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain;
  Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
  "Gone is Antilochus (the hero said);
  But hope not, warriors, for Achilles' aid:
  Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his woe,
  Unarm'd, he fights not with the Trojan foe.
  'Tis in our hands alone our hopes remain,
  'Tis our own vigour must the dead regain,
  And save ourselves, while with impetuous hate
  Troy pours along, and this way rolls our fate."

  "'Tis well (said Ajax), be it then thy care,
  With Merion's aid, the weighty corse to rear;
  Myself, and my bold brother will sustain
  The shock of Hector and his charging train:
  Nor fear we armies, fighting side by side;
  What Troy can dare, we have already tried,
  Have tried it, and have stood." The hero said.
  High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
  A general clamour rises at the sight:
  Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the fight.
  Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood,
  With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood,
  Voracious hounds, that many a length before
  Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar;
  But if the savage turns his glaring eye,
  They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
  Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
  Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:
  But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield,
  All pale they tremble and forsake the field.

  While thus aloft the hero's corse they bear,
  Behind them rages all the storm of war:
  Confusion, tumult, horror, o'er the throng
  Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along:
  Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire
  To whelm some city under waves of fire;
  Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,
  Now crack the blazing temples of the gods;
  The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls,
  And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.
  The heroes sweat beneath their honour'd load:
  As when two mules, along the rugged road,
  From the steep mountain with exerted strength
  Drag some vast beam, or mast's unwieldy length;
  Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,
  The enormous timber lumbering down the hill:
  So these--Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands,
  And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
  Thus when a river swell'd with sudden rains
  Spreads his broad waters o'er the level plains,
  Some interposing hill the stream divides.
  And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
  Still close they follow, close the rear engage;
  Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:
  While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains,
  Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,
  That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung
  High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
  So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,
  Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry:
  Within, without the trench, and all the way,
  Strow'd in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay;
  Such horror Jove impress'd! yet still proceeds
  The work of death, and still the battle bleeds.

               [Illustration: VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.]

                       VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.





BOOK XVIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN.

The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by Antilochus.
Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea- nymphs to
comfort him. The speeches of the mother and son on this occasion. Iris
appears to Achilles by the command of Juno, and orders him to show himself
at the head of the intrenchments. The sight of him turns the fortunes of
the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off by the Greeks. The
Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas disagree in their
opinions: but the advice of the former prevails, to remain encamped in the
field. The grief of Achilles over the body of Patroclus.

Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan to obtain new arms for her son. The
description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that noble one
of the shield of Achilles.

The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night ensuing, take
up this book: the scene is at Achilles' tent on the sea-shore, from whence
it changes to the palace of Vulcan.

  Thus like the rage of fire the combat burns,(250)
  And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
  Meanwhile, where Hellespont's broad waters flow,
  Stood Nestor's son, the messenger of woe:
  There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails,
  On hoisted yards extended to the gales;
  Pensive he sat; for all that fate design'd
  Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind.
  Thus to his soul he said: "Ah! what constrains
  The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
  Is this the day, which heaven so long ago
  Ordain'd, to sink me with the weight of woe?
  (So Thetis warn'd;) when by a Trojan hand
  The bravest of the Myrmidonian band
  Should lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree;
  Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he!
  In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain,
  And warn'd to shun Hectorean force in vain!"

  Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears,
  And tells the melancholy tale with tears.
  "Sad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear;
  And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!
  Dead is Patroclus! For his corse they fight;
  His naked corse: his arms are Hector's right."

  A sudden horror shot through all the chief,
  And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief;
  Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread
  The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head;
  His purple garments, and his golden hairs,
  Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears;
  On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,
  And roll'd and grovell'd, as to earth he grew.
  The virgin captives, with disorder'd charms,
  (Won by his own, or by Patroclus' arms,)
  Rush'd from their tents with cries; and gathering round,
  Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground:
  While Nestor's son sustains a manlier part,
  And mourns the warrior with a warrior's heart;
  Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,
  And oft prevents the meditated blow.

  Far in the deep abysses of the main,(251)
  With hoary Nereus, and the watery train,
  The mother-goddess from her crystal throne
  Heard his loud cries, and answer'd groan for groan.
  The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,
  And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
  Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),
  Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came:
  Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
  And the blue languish of soft Alia's eye.
  Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
  Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
  Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
  Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
  Next Callianira, Callianassa show
  Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow,
  And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides:
  Iaera now the verdant wave divides:
  Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head,
  Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;
  These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
  Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;
  And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
  And Amatheia with her amber hair.
  All these, and all that deep in ocean held
  Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill'd;
  Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe,
  Till Thetis' sorrows thus began to flow:

  "Hear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
  How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
  How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
  How more than wretched in the immortal state!
  Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came,
  The bravest far that ever bore the name;
  Like some fair olive, by my careful hand
  He grew, he flourish'd and adorn'd the land
  To Troy I sent him: but the fates ordain
  He never, never must return again.
  So short a space the light of heaven to view,
  So short, alas! and fill'd with anguish too!
  Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
  I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
  I go at least to bear a tender part,
  And mourn my loved-one with a mother's heart."

  She said, and left the caverns of the main,
  All bathed in tears; the melancholy train
  Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,
  While the long pomp the silver wave divides.
  Approaching now, they touch'd the Trojan land;
  Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
  The immortal mother, standing close beside
  Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied;
  Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,
  And thus the silver-footed dame began:

  "Why mourns my son? thy late preferr'd request
  The god has granted, and the Greeks distress'd:
  Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share,
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He, deeply groaning--"To this cureless grief,
  Not even the Thunderer's favour brings relief.
  Patroclus--Ah!--say, goddess, can I boast
  A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost;
  Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,
  Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
  Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow'd
  On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
  Cursed be that day, when all the powers above
  Thy charms submitted to a mortal love:
  O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,
  Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign:
  And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
  A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
  Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb
  Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come.
  For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,
  New woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
  'Tis not in fate the alternate now to give;
  Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
  Let me revenge it on proud Hector's heart,
  Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;
  On these conditions will I breathe: till then,
  I blush to walk among the race of men."

  A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed:
  "Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
  When Hector falls, thou diest."--"Let Hector die,
  And let me fall! (Achilles made reply)
  Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
  He fell, and falling, wish'd my aid in vain.
  Ah then, since from this miserable day
  I cast all hope of my return away;
  Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand
  The fate of Hector from Achilles' hand;
  Since here, for brutal courage far renown'd,
  I live an idle burden to the ground,
  (Others in council famed for nobler skill,
  More useful to preserve, than I to kill,)
  Let me--But oh! ye gracious powers above!
  Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove:
  Far, far too dear to every mortal breast,
  Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste:
  Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind
  From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind.
  Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate;
  'Tis past--I quell it; I resign to fate.
  Yes--I will meet the murderer of my friend;
  Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end.
  The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun:
  The great Alcides, Jove's unequall'd son,
  To Juno's hate, at length resign'd his breath,
  And sunk the victim of all-conquering death.
  So shall Achilles fall! stretch'd pale and dead,
  No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!
  Let me, this instant, rush into the fields,
  And reap what glory life's short harvest yields.
  Shall I not force some widow'd dame to tear
  With frantic hands her long dishevell'd hair?
  Shall I not force her breast to heave with sighs,
  And the soft tears to trickle from her eyes?
  Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charms--
  In vain you hold me--Hence! my arms! my arms!--
  Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide,
  That all shall know Achilles swells the tide."

  "My son (coerulean Thetis made reply,
  To fate submitting with a secret sigh,)
  The host to succour, and thy friends to save,
  Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave.
  But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains?
  Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains.
  Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
  But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
  Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
  Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day,
  Charged with refulgent arms (a glorious load),
  Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god."

  Then turning to the daughters of the main,
  The goddess thus dismiss'd her azure train:

  "Ye sister Nereids! to your deeps descend;
  Haste, and our father's sacred seat attend;
  I go to find the architect divine,
  Where vast Olympus' starry summits shine:
  So tell our hoary sire"--This charge she gave:
  The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the wave:
  Thetis once more ascends the bless'd abodes,
  And treads the brazen threshold of the gods.

   [Illustration: THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.]

           THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.


  And now the Greeks from furious Hector's force,
  Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course;
  Nor yet their chiefs Patroclus' body bore
  Safe through the tempest to the tented shore.
  The horse, the foot, with equal fury join'd,
  Pour'd on the rear, and thunder'd close behind:
  And like a flame through fields of ripen'd corn,
  The rage of Hector o'er the ranks was borne.
  Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew;
  Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:
  As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain;
  But check'd, he turns; repuls'd, attacks again.
  With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,
  Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires:
  So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,
  The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
  Even yet Patroclus had he borne away,
  And all the glories of the extended day,
  Had not high Juno from the realms of air,
  Secret, despatch'd her trusty messenger.
  The various goddess of the showery bow,
  Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below;
  To great Achilles at his ships she came,
  And thus began the many-colour'd dame:

  "Rise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!
  Assist the combat, and Patroclus save:
  For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread,
  And fall by mutual wounds around the dead.
  To drag him back to Troy the foe contends:
  Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends:
  A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie,
  And marks the place to fix his head on high.
  Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame)
  Thy friend's disgrace, thy own eternal shame!"

  "Who sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?"
  Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies:

  "I come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove,
  The immortal empress of the realms above;
  Unknown to him who sits remote on high,
  Unknown to all the synod of the sky."
  "Thou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warm'd);
  Arms I have none, and can I fight unarm'd?
  Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,
  Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day
  Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield,
  Except the mighty Telamonian shield?
  That, in my friend's defence, has Ajax spread,
  While his strong lance around him heaps the dead:
  The gallant chief defends Menoetius' son,
  And does what his Achilles should have done."

  "Thy want of arms (said Iris) well we know;
  But though unarm'd, yet clad in terrors, go!
  Let but Achilles o'er yon trench appear,
  Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;
  Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye
  Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly."

  She spoke, and pass'd in air. The hero rose:
  Her aegis Pallas o'er his shoulder throws;
  Around his brows a golden cloud she spread;
  A stream of glory flamed above his head.
  As when from some beleaguer'd town arise
  The smokes, high curling to the shaded skies;
  (Seen from some island, o'er the main afar,
  When men distress'd hang out the sign of war;)
  Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays,
  Thick on the hills the flaming beacons blaze;
  With long-projected beams the seas are bright,
  And heaven's high arch reflects the ruddy light:
  So from Achilles' head the splendours rise,
  Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.
  Forth march'd the chief, and distant from the crowd,
  High on the rampart raised his voice aloud;
  With her own shout Minerva swells the sound;
  Troy starts astonish'd, and the shores rebound.
  As the loud trumpet's brazen mouth from far
  With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war,
  Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,
  And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply;
  So high his brazen voice the hero rear'd:
  Hosts dropp'd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
  And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
  And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
  Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
  And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
  Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
  And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
  Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush'd
  On their own spears, by their own chariots crush'd:
  While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
  The long-contended carcase of the slain.

  A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
  Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
  But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
  Pours unavailing sorrows o'er the dead,
  Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
  He sent refulgent to the field of war;
  (Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
  Stretch'd forth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound.

  Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
  In ocean's waves the unwilling light of day
  Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,
  And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
  The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
  Their steeds unharness'd from the weary car)
  A sudden council call'd: each chief appear'd
  In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear'd.
  'Twas now no season for prolong'd debate;
  They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
  Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
  Skill'd to discern the future by the past,
  The son of Panthus, thus express'd his fears
  (The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
  The self-same night to both a being gave,
  One wise in council, one in action brave):

             [Illustration: JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.]

                     JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.


  "In free debate, my friends, your sentence speak;
  For me, I move, before the morning break,
  To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post,
  Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.
  I deem'd not Greece so dreadful, while engaged
  In mutual feuds her king and hero raged;
  Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail
  We boldly camp'd beside a thousand sail.
  I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind
  Not long continues to the shores confined,
  Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray
  Contending nations won and lost the day;
  For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife,
  And the hard contest not for fame, but life.
  Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night
  Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight.
  If but the morrow's sun behold us here,
  That arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear;
  And hearts that now disdain, shall leap with joy,
  If heaven permit them then to enter Troy.
  Let not my fatal prophecy be true,
  Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
  Whatever be our fate, yet let us try
  What force of thought and reason can supply;
  Let us on counsel for our guard depend;
  The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.
  When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers,
  Array'd in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
  Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls,
  Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls,
  Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain,
  Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again:
  So may his rage be tired, and labour'd down!
  And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town."

  "Return! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain)
  What! coop whole armies in our walls again?
  Was't not enough, ye valiant warriors, say,
  Nine years imprison'd in those towers ye lay?
  Wide o'er the world was Ilion famed of old
  For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold:
  But while inglorious in her walls we stay'd,
  Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decay'd;
  The Phrygians now her scatter'd spoils enjoy,
  And proud Maeonia wastes the fruits of Troy.
  Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls,
  And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls,
  Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?
  Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his flight.
  To better counsel then attention lend;
  Take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
  If there be one whose riches cost him care,
  Forth let him bring them for the troops to share;
  'Tis better generously bestow'd on those,
  Than left the plunder of our country's foes.
  Soon as the morn the purple orient warms,
  Fierce on yon navy will we pour our arms.
  If great Achilles rise in all his might,
  His be the danger: I shall stand the fight.
  Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give;
  And live he glorious, whosoe'er shall live!
  Mars is our common lord, alike to all;
  And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall."

  The shouting host in loud applauses join'd;
  So Pallas robb'd the many of their mind;
  To their own sense condemn'd, and left to choose
  The worst advice, the better to refuse.

  While the long night extends her sable reign,
  Around Patroclus mourn'd the Grecian train.
  Stern in superior grief Pelides stood;
  Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood,
  Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start
  The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart.
  The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his young;
  When the grim savage, to his rifled den
  Too late returning, snuffs the track of men,
  And o'er the vales and o'er the forest bounds;
  His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.
  So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents
  To all his Myrmidons his loud laments.

  "In what vain promise, gods! did I engage,
  When to console Menoetius' feeble age,
  I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore,
  Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntia's shore?(252)
  But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain,
  The long, long views of poor designing man!
  One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike,
  And Troy's black sands must drink our blood alike:
  Me too a wretched mother shall deplore,
  An aged father never see me more!
  Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,
  Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
  Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid,
  Shall Hector's head be offer'd to thy shade;
  That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine;
  And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line,
  Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire;
  Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.
  Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely press'd,
  Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!
  While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay,
  Weep all the night and murmur all the day:
  Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,
  Our swords kept time, and conquer'd side by side."

  He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round
  Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honour'd wound.
  A massy caldron of stupendous frame
  They brought, and placed it o'er the rising flame:
  Then heap'd the lighted wood; the flame divides
  Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:
  In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream;
  The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
  The body then they bathe with pious toil,
  Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil,
  High on a bed of state extended laid,
  And decent cover'd with a linen shade;
  Last o'er the dead the milk-white veil they threw;
  That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew.

  Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above,
  (His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
  "At last thy will prevails: great Peleus' son
  Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
  Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
  And thou the mother of that martial line?"

  "What words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
  While anger flash'd from her majestic eyes)
  Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
  And such success mere human wit attend:
  And shall not I, the second power above,
  Heaven's queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
  Say, shall not I one nation's fate command,
  Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?"

                         [Illustration: TRIPOD.]

                                 TRIPOD.


  So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
  Reach'd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
  High-eminent amid the works divine,
  Where heaven's far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
  There the lame architect the goddess found,
  Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
  While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
  And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
  That day no common task his labour claim'd:
  Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
  That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
  (Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll'd
  From place to place, around the bless'd abodes
  Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
  For their fair handles now, o'erwrought with flowers,
  In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
  Just as responsive to his thought the frame
  Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
  Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
  (With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
  Observed her entering; her soft hand she press'd,
  And, smiling, thus the watery queen address'd:

  "What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
  All hail, and welcome! whatsoe'er the cause;
  Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
  Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower."

     [Illustration: THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.]

             THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.


  High on a throne, with stars of silver graced,
  And various artifice, the queen she placed;
  A footstool at her feet: then calling, said,
  "Vulcan, draw near, 'tis Thetis asks your aid."
  "Thetis (replied the god) our powers may claim,
  An ever-dear, an ever-honour'd name!
  When my proud mother hurl'd me from the sky,
  (My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,)
  She, and Eurynome, my griefs redress'd,
  And soft received me on their silver breast.
  Even then these arts employ'd my infant thought:
  Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought.
  Nine years kept secret in the dark abode,
  Secure I lay, conceal'd from man and god:
  Deep in a cavern'd rock my days were led;
  The rushing ocean murmur'd o'er my head.
  Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say,
  For such desert what service can I pay?
  Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share
  The genial rites, and hospitable fare;
  While I the labours of the forge forego,
  And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow."

  Then from his anvil the lame artist rose;
  Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes,
  And stills the bellows, and (in order laid)
  Locks in their chests his instruments of trade.
  Then with a sponge the sooty workman dress'd
  His brawny arms embrown'd, and hairy breast.
  With his huge sceptre graced, and red attire,
  Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire:
  The monarch's steps two female forms uphold,
  That moved and breathed in animated gold;
  To whom was voice, and sense, and science given
  Of works divine (such wonders are in heaven!)
  On these supported, with unequal gait,
  He reach'd the throne where pensive Thetis sate;
  There placed beside her on the shining frame,
  He thus address'd the silver-footed dame:

  "Thee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls
  (So long a stranger) to these honour'd walls?
  'Tis thine, fair Thetis, the command to lay,
  And Vulcan's joy and duty to obey."

           [Illustration: VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.]

                   VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.


  To whom the mournful mother thus replies:
  (The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:)
  "O Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine
  So pierced with sorrows, so o'erwhelm'd as mine?
  Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare
  For Thetis only such a weight of care?
  I, only I, of all the watery race
  By force subjected to a man's embrace,
  Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays
  The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
  Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
  The bravest sure that ever bore the name;
  Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand
  He grew, he flourish'd, and he graced the land:
  To Troy I sent him! but his native shore
  Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
  (Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;)
  Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!
  Robb'd of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave,
  The king of nations forced his royal slave:
  For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress'd
  Required his arm, he sorrow'd unredress'd.
  Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;
  In vain--he arms not, but permits his friend
  His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:
  He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
  Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the name)
  At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
  But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:
  Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son,
  And to the field in martial pomp restore,
  To shine with glory, till he shines no more!"

  To her the artist-god: "Thy griefs resign,
  Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
  O could I hide him from the Fates, as well,
  Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
  As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
  Of wondering ages, and the world's amaze!"

  Thus having said, the father of the fires
  To the black labours of his forge retires.
  Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turn'd
  Their iron mouths; and where the furnace burn'd,
  Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires,
  And twenty forges catch at once the fires;
  Just as the god directs, now loud, now low,
  They raise a tempest, or they gently blow;
  In hissing flames huge silver bars are roll'd,
  And stubborn brass, and tin, and solid gold;
  Before, deep fix'd, the eternal anvils stand;
  The ponderous hammer loads his better hand,
  His left with tongs turns the vex'd metal round,
  And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound.

  Then first he form'd the immense and solid shield;
  Rich various artifice emblazed the field;
  Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;(253)
  A silver chain suspends the massy round;
  Five ample plates the broad expanse compose,
  And godlike labours on the surface rose.
  There shone the image of the master-mind:
  There earth, there heaven, there ocean he design'd;
  The unwearied sun, the moon completely round;
  The starry lights that heaven's high convex crown'd;
  The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern team;
  And great Orion's more refulgent beam;
  To which, around the axle of the sky,
  The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye,
  Still shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
  Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.

  Two cities radiant on the shield appear,
  The image one of peace, and one of war.
  Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight,
  And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite;
  Along the street the new-made brides are led,
  With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed:
  The youthful dancers in a circle bound
  To the soft flute, and cithern's silver sound:
  Through the fair streets the matrons in a row
  Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show.

  There in the forum swarm a numerous train;
  The subject of debate, a townsman slain:
  One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied,
  And bade the public and the laws decide:
  The witness is produced on either hand:
  For this, or that, the partial people stand:
  The appointed heralds still the noisy bands,
  And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands:
  On seats of stone, within the sacred place,(254)
  The reverend elders nodded o'er the case;
  Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
  And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke
  Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
  The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

  Another part (a prospect differing far)(255)
  Glow'd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
  Two mighty hosts a leaguer'd town embrace,
  And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
  Meantime the townsmen, arm'd with silent care,
  A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
  Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
  Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
  They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
  Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
  And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
  August, divine, superior by the head!
  A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
  Cover'd with shields, beside a silver flood.
  Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
  If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
  Soon the white flocks proceeded o'er the plains,
  And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
  Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
  Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
  In arms the glittering squadron rising round
  Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground;
  Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains,
  And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
  The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear;
  They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,
  They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood;
  The waving silver seem'd to blush with blood.
  There Tumult, there Contention stood confess'd;
  One rear'd a dagger at a captive's breast;
  One held a living foe, that freshly bled
  With new-made wounds; another dragg'd a dead;
  Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:
  Fate stalk'd amidst them, grim with human gore.
  And the whole war came out, and met the eye;
  And each bold figure seem'd to live or die.

  A field deep furrow'd next the god design'd,(256)
  The third time labour'd by the sweating hind;
  The shining shares full many ploughmen guide,
  And turn their crooked yokes on every side.
  Still as at either end they wheel around,
  The master meets them with his goblet crown'd;
  The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil,
  Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil:
  Behind, the rising earth in ridges roll'd;
  And sable look'd, though form'd of molten gold.

  Another field rose high with waving grain;
  With bended sickles stand the reaper train:
  Here stretched in ranks the levell'd swarths are found,
  Sheaves heap'd on sheaves here thicken up the ground.
  With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands;
  The gatherers follow, and collect in bands;
  And last the children, in whose arms are borne
  (Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.
  The rustic monarch of the field descries,
  With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
  A ready banquet on the turf is laid,
  Beneath an ample oak's expanded shade.
  The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare;
  The reaper's due repast, the woman's care.

  Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines,
  Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines;
  A deeper dye the dangling clusters show,
  And curl'd on silver props, in order glow:
  A darker metal mix'd intrench'd the place;
  And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
  To this, one pathway gently winding leads,
  Where march a train with baskets on their heads,
  (Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear
  The purple product of the autumnal year.
  To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,
  Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings;
  In measured dance behind him move the train,
  Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.

  Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold,
  Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,
  And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores
  A rapid torrent through the rushes roars:
  Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand,
  And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
  Two lions rushing from the wood appear'd;
  And seized a bull, the master of the herd:
  He roar'd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
  They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
  The dogs (oft cheer'd in vain) desert the prey,
  Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.

  Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads
  Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads,
  And stalls, and folds, and scatter'd cots between;
  And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.

  A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen
  In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,
  Form'd by Daedalean art; a comely band
  Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
  The maids in soft simars of linen dress'd;
  The youths all graceful in the glossy vest:
  Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll'd;
  Of these the sides adorn'd with swords of gold,
  That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
  Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
  With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways,
  Confusedly regular, the moving maze:
  Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
  And undistinguish'd blend the flying ring:
  So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle toss'd,
  And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.
  The gazing multitudes admire around:
  Two active tumblers in the centre bound;
  Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend:
  And general songs the sprightly revel end.

  Thus the broad shield complete the artist crown'd
  With his last hand, and pour'd the ocean round:
  In living silver seem'd the waves to roll,
  And beat the buckler's verge, and bound the whole.

  This done, whate'er a warrior's use requires
  He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires,
  The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impress'd
  With various sculpture, and the golden crest.
  At Thetis' feet the finished labour lay:
  She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way,
  Swift from Olympus' snowy summit flies,
  And bears the blazing present through the skies.(257)





BOOK XIX.


ARGUMENT.

THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.

Thetis brings to her son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves the body
of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the army, to
declare his resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are solemnly
reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that occasion.
Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from the battle
till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice of Ulysses. The
presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, where Briseis laments over
the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinately refuses all repast, and gives
himself up to lamentations for his friend. Minerva descends to strengthen
him, by the order of Jupiter. He arms for the fight: his appearance
described. He addresses himself to his horses, and reproaches them with
the death of Patroclus. One of them is miraculously endued with voice, and
inspired to prophesy his fate: but the hero, not astonished by that
prodigy, rushes with fury to the combat.

The thirteenth day. The scene is on the sea-shore.

  Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head
  Above the waves, that blush'd with early red,
  (With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)
  The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears
  Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears
  Stretch'd o'er Patroclus' corse; while all the rest
  Their sovereign's sorrows in their own express'd.
  A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,
  And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

  "Suppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know
  It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow;
  Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow'd,
  Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god."

  Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
  Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
  Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
  And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
  Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
  And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
  From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
  And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
  He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
  On all the immortal artist had design'd.

  "Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
  With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
  Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
  But ah! the relics of my slaughter'd friend!
  In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
  Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?"

  "That unavailing care be laid aside,
  (The azure goddess to her son replied,)
  Whole years untouch'd, uninjured shall remain,
  Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
  But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
  Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
  Then uncontroll'd in boundless war engage,
  And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!"

         [Illustration: THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.]

                 THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.


  Then in the nostrils of the slain she pour'd
  Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia shower'd
  O'er all the corse. The flies forbid their prey,
  Untouch'd it rests, and sacred from decay.
  Achilles to the strand obedient went:
  The shores resounded with the voice he sent.
  The heroes heard, and all the naval train
  That tend the ships, or guide them o'er the main,
  Alarm'd, transported, at the well-known sound,
  Frequent and full, the great assembly crown'd;
  Studious to see the terror of the plain,
  Long lost to battle, shine in arms again.
  Tydides and Ulysses first appear,
  Lame with their wounds, and leaning on the spear;
  These on the sacred seats of council placed,
  The king of men, Atrides, came the last:
  He too sore wounded by Agenor's son.
  Achilles (rising in the midst) begun:

  "O monarch! better far had been the fate
  Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state,
  If (ere the day when by mad passion sway'd,
  Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid)
  Preventing Dian had despatch'd her dart,
  And shot the shining mischief to the heart!
  Then many a hero had not press'd the shore,
  Nor Troy's glad fields been fatten'd with our gore.
  Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail,
  And sad posterity repeat the tale.
  But this, no more the subject of debate,
  Is past, forgotten, and resign'd to fate.
  Why should, alas, a mortal man, as I,
  Burn with a fury that can never die?
  Here then my anger ends: let war succeed,
  And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.
  Now call the hosts, and try if in our sight
  Troy yet shall dare to camp a second night!
  I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows,
  Shall 'scape with transport, and with joy repose."

  He said: his finish'd wrath with loud acclaim
  The Greeks accept, and shout Pelides' name.
  When thus, not rising from his lofty throne,
  In state unmoved, the king of men begun:

  "Hear me, ye sons of Greece! with silence hear!
  And grant your monarch an impartial ear:
  Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend,
  And let your rash, injurious clamours end:
  Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause,
  Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.
  Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate:
  Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,
  With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day
  When from Achilles' arms I forced the prey.
  What then could I against the will of heaven?
  Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven;
  She, Jove's dread daughter, fated to infest
  The race of mortals, enter'd in my breast.
  Not on the ground that haughty fury treads,
  But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads
  Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes
  Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes!
  Of old, she stalk'd amid the bright abodes;
  And Jove himself, the sire of men and gods,
  The world's great ruler, felt her venom'd dart;
  Deceived by Juno's wiles, and female art:
  For when Alcmena's nine long months were run,
  And Jove expected his immortal son,
  To gods and goddesses the unruly joy
  He show'd, and vaunted of his matchless boy:
  'From us, (he said) this day an infant springs,
  Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.'
  Saturnia ask'd an oath, to vouch the truth,
  And fix dominion on the favour'd youth.
  The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud,
  Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
  The joyful goddess, from Olympus' height,
  Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight:
  Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelus's wife;
  She push'd her lingering infant into life:
  Her charms Alcmena's coming labours stay,
  And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
  Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;
  'A youth (said she) of Jove's immortal kind
  Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,
  And claims thy promise to be king of kings.'
  Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged;
  Stung to the soul, he sorrow'd, and he raged.
  From his ambrosial head, where perch'd she sate,
  He snatch'd the fury-goddess of debate,
  The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
  The immortal seats should ne'er behold her more;
  And whirl'd her headlong down, for ever driven
  From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
  Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
  Ordain'd with man's contentious race to dwell.
  Full oft the god his son's hard toils bemoan'd,
  Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groan'd.(258)
  Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
  While raging Hector heap'd our camps with dead.
  What can the errors of my rage atone?
  My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
  This instant from the navy shall be sent
  Whate'er Ulysses promised at thy tent:
  But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
  Resume thy arms, and shine again in war."

  " O king of nations! whose superior sway
  (Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
  To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
  To us, 'tis equal: all we ask is war.
  While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
  The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
  Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
  The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
  With emulation, what I act survey,
  And learn from thence the business of the day.

  The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
  The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
  "Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress'd,
  At least our armies claim repast and rest:
  Long and laborious must the combat be,
  When by the gods inspired, and led by thee.
  Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,
  And those augment by generous wine and food:
  What boastful son of war, without that stay,
  Can last a hero through a single day?
  Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength,
  Mere unsupported man must yield at length;
  Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined,
  The drooping body will desert the mind:
  But built anew with strength-conferring fare,
  With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
  Dismiss the people, then, and give command.
  With strong repast to hearten every band;
  But let the presents to Achilles made,
  In full assembly of all Greece be laid.
  The king of men shall rise in public sight,
  And solemn swear (observant of the rite)
  That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes,
  Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
  That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made,
  And the full price of injured honour paid.
  Stretch not henceforth, O prince.! thy sovereign might
  Beyond the bounds of reason and of right;
  'Tis the chief praise that e'er to kings belong'd,
  To right with justice whom with power they wrong'd."

  To him the monarch: "Just is thy decree,
  Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee.
  Each due atonement gladly I prepare;
  And heaven regard me as I justly swear!
  Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,
  Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay.
  Till from the fleet our presents be convey'd,
  And Jove attesting, the firm compact made.
  A train of noble youths the charge shall bear;
  These to select, Ulysses, be thy care:
  In order rank'd let all our gifts appear,
  And the fair train of captives close the rear:
  Talthybius shall the victim boar convey,
  Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day."

  "For this (the stern Ãacides replies)
  Some less important season may suffice,
  When the stern fury of the war is o'er,
  And wrath, extinguish'd, burns my breast no more.
  By Hector slain, their faces to the sky,
  All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie:
  Those call to war! and might my voice incite,
  Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight:
  Then, when the day's complete, let generous bowls,
  And copious banquets, glad your weary souls.
  Let not my palate know the taste of food,
  Till my insatiate rage be cloy'd with blood:
  Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured o'er,
  And his cold feet are pointed to the door.
  Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care,
  Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there;
  Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds,
  And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds."

  "O first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoin'd,)
  The best and bravest of the warrior kind!
  Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine,
  But old experience and calm wisdom mine.
  Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield,
  The bravest soon are satiate of the field;
  Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain,
  The bloody harvest brings but little gain:
  The scale of conquest ever wavering lies,
  Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies!
  The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall,
  And endless were the grief, to weep for all.
  Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?
  Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead:
  Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay
  The tribute of a melancholy day.
  One chief with patience to the grave resign'd,
  Our care devolves on others left behind.
  Let generous food supplies of strength produce,
  Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice,
  Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow,
  And pour new furies on the feebler foe.
  Yet a short interval, and none shall dare
  Expect a second summons to the war;
  Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find,
  If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
  Embodied, to the battle let us bend,
  And all at once on haughty Troy descend."

  And now the delegates Ulysses sent,
  To bear the presents from the royal tent:
  The sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant heir,
  Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
  With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
  And Melanippus, form'd the chosen train.
  Swift as the word was given, the youths obey'd:
  Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
  A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
  And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
  Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
  The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose,
  Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,
  First of the train, the golden talents bore:
  The rest in public view the chiefs dispose,
  A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:
  The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord
  Drew the broad cutlass sheath'd beside his sword:
  The stubborn bristles from the victim's brow
  He crops, and offering meditates his vow.
  His hands uplifted to the attesting skies,
  On heaven's broad marble roof were fixed his eyes.
  The solemn words a deep attention draw,
  And Greece around sat thrill'd with sacred awe.

  "Witness thou first! thou greatest power above,
  All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
  And mother-earth, and heaven's revolving light,
  And ye, fell furies of the realms of night,
  Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
  For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
  The black-eyed maid inviolate removes,
  Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
  If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed,
  And levell'd thunder strike my guilty head!"

  With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound;
  The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground;
  The sacred herald rolls the victim slain
  (A feast for fish) into the foaming main.

  Then thus Achilles: "Hear, ye Greeks! and know
  Whate'er we feel, 'tis Jove inflicts the woe;
  Not else Atrides could our rage inflame,
  Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame.
  'Twas Jove's high will alone, o'erruling all,
  That doom'd our strife, and doom'd the Greeks to fall.
  Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite;
  Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight."

  The speedy council at his word adjourn'd:
  To their black vessels all the Greeks return'd.
  Achilles sought his tent. His train before
  March'd onward, bending with the gifts they bore.
  Those in the tents the squires industrious spread:
  The foaming coursers to the stalls they led;
  To their new seats the female captives move
  Briseis, radiant as the queen of love,
  Slow as she pass'd, beheld with sad survey
  Where, gash'd with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
  Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair,
  Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;
  All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes
  Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:

  "Ah, youth for ever dear, for ever kind,
  Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
  I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;
  Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
  What woes my wretched race of life attend!
  Sorrows on sorrows, never doom'd to end!
  The first loved consort of my virgin bed
  Before these eyes in fatal battle bled:
  My three brave brothers in one mournful day
  All trod the dark, irremeable way:
  Thy friendly hand uprear'd me from the plain,
  And dried my sorrows for a husband slain;
  Achilles' care you promised I should prove,
  The first, the dearest partner of his love;
  That rites divine should ratify the band,
  And make me empress in his native land.
  Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
  For thee, that ever felt another's woe!"

  Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
  Nor mourn'd Patroclus' fortunes, but their own.
  The leaders press'd the chief on every side;
  Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

  "If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
  Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
  Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
  To grief and anguish one abstemious day."

  He spoke, and from the warriors turn'd his face:
  Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus' race,
  Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
  And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
  His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
  He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

  "Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
  Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
  Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
  Once stay'd Achilles, rushing to the war.
  But now, alas! to death's cold arms resign'd,
  What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
  What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
  What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
  Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
  His son's sad fate, and drops a tender tear.
  What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
  My only offspring, sink into the grave?
  If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far,
  Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)
  I could not this, this cruel stroke attend;
  Fate claim'd Achilles, but might spare his friend.
  I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
  My tender orphan with a parent's care,
  From Scyros' isle conduct him o'er the main,
  And glad his eyes with his paternal reign,
  The lofty palace, and the large domain.
  For Peleus breathes no more the vital air;
  Or drags a wretched life of age and care,
  But till the news of my sad fate invades
  His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades."

  Sighing he said: his grief the heroes join'd,
  Each stole a tear for what he left behind.
  Their mingled grief the sire of heaven survey'd,
  And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid:

  "Is then Achilles now no more thy care,
  And dost thou thus desert the great in war?
  Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend,
  All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend:
  Ere thirst and want his forces have oppress'd,
  Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast."

  He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove,
  Shot the descending goddess from above.
  So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs,
  The wide air floating to her ample wings,
  To great Achilles she her flight address'd,
  And pour'd divine ambrosia in his breast,(259)
  With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!)
  Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes.

  Now issued from the ships the warrior-train,
  And like a deluge pour'd upon the plain.
  As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow,
  And scatter o'er the fields the driving snow;
  From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies,
  Whose dazzling lustre whitens all the skies:
  So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields,
  Catch the quick beams, and brighten all the fields;
  Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays,
  Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze;
  Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound;
  With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around,

  Full in the midst, high-towering o'er the rest,
  His limbs in arms divine Achilles dress'd;
  Arms which the father of the fire bestow'd,
  Forged on the eternal anvils of the god.
  Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire,
  His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire;
  He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay
  O'erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.

  The silver cuishes first his thighs infold;
  Then o'er his breast was braced the hollow gold;
  The brazen sword a various baldric tied,
  That, starr'd with gems, hung glittering at his side;
  And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield
  Blazed with long rays, and gleam'd athwart the field.

  So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears,
  Wide o'er the watery waste, a light appears,
  Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high,
  Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky:
  With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
  Loud howls the storm, and drives them o'er the main.

  Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind
  The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind:
  Like the red star, that from his flaming hair
  Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war;
  So stream'd the golden honours from his head,
  Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
  The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
  His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
  Buoy'd by some inward force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.

  And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
  Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,
  From Pelion's cloudy top an ash entire
  Old Chiron fell'd, and shaped it for his sire;
  A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
  The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

  Automedon and Alcimus prepare
  The immortal coursers, and the radiant car;
  (The silver traces sweeping at their side;)
  Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied;
  The ivory-studded reins, return'd behind,
  Waved o'er their backs, and to the chariot join'd.
  The charioteer then whirl'd the lash around,
  And swift ascended at one active bound.
  All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
  Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;
  Not brighter Phoebus in the ethereal way
  Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
  High o'er the host, all terrible he stands,
  And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:

  "Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' strain,
  (Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)
  Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
  And learn to make your master more your care:
  Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
  Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord."

  The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
  Seem'd sensible of woe, and droop'd his head:
  Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
  And bow'd to dust the honours of his mane.
  When, strange to tell! (so Juno will'd) he broke
  Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
  "Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear
  Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
  But come it will, the fatal time must come,
  Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
  Not through our crime, or slowness in the course,
  Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force;
  The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day
  (Confess'd we saw him) tore his arms way.
  No--could our swiftness o'er the winds prevail,
  Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
  All were in vain--the Fates thy death demand,
  Due to a mortal and immortal hand."

  Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
  His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied
  With unabated rage--"So let it be!
  Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
  I know my fate: to die, to see no more
  My much-loved parents, and my native shore--
  Enough--when heaven ordains, I sink in night:
  Now perish Troy!" He said, and rush'd to fight.

                        [Illustration: HERCULES.]

                                HERCULES.





BOOK XX.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.

Jupiter, upon Achilles' return to the battle, calls a council of the gods,
and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the combat
described, when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Ãneas to meet
Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes encounter; but Ãneas
is preserved by the assistance of Neptune. Achilles falls upon the rest of
the Trojans, and is upon the point of killing Hector, but Apollo conveys
him away in a cloud. Achilles pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter.

The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy.

  Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood
  Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood;
  While near impending from a neighbouring height,
  Troy's black battalions wait the shock of fight.
  Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call
  The gods to council in the starry hall:
  Swift o'er Olympus' hundred hills she flies,
  And summons all the senate of the skies.
  These shining on, in long procession come
  To Jove's eternal adamantine dome.
  Not one was absent, not a rural power
  That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;
  Each fair-hair'd dryad of the shady wood,
  Each azure sister of the silver flood;
  All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps
  His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
  On marble thrones, with lucid columns crown'd,
  (The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around.
  Even he whose trident sways the watery reign
  Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main,
  Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
  And question'd thus the sire of men and gods:

  "What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
  And grasps the thunder in his awful hands,
  Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
  Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?
  Already met, the louring hosts appear,
  And death stands ardent on the edge of war."

  "'Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies)
  This day we call the council of the skies
  In care of human race; even Jove's own eye
  Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
  Far on Olympus' top in secret state
  Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate
  Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend,
  And as your minds direct, your succour lend
  To either host. Troy soon must lie o'erthrown,
  If uncontroll'd Achilles fights alone:
  Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes;
  What can they now, if in his rage he rise?
  Assist them, gods! or Ilion's sacred wall
  May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall."

  He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.
  On adverse parts the warring gods engage:
  Heaven's awful queen; and he whose azure round
  Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renown'd;
  Hermes, of profitable arts the sire;
  And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire:
  These to the fleet repair with instant flight;
  The vessels tremble as the gods alight.
  In aid of Troy, Latona, Phoebus came,
  Mars fiery-helm'd, the laughter-loving dame,
  Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow,
  And the chaste huntress of the silver bow.
  Ere yet the gods their various aid employ,
  Each Argive bosom swell'd with manly joy,
  While great Achilles (terror of the plain),
  Long lost to battle, shone in arms again.
  Dreadful he stood in front of all his host;
  Pale Troy beheld, and seem'd already lost;
  Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear,
  And trembling see another god of war.

  But when the powers descending swell'd the fight,
  Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright
  Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms,
  Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.
  Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls,
  And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.
  Mars hovering o'er his Troy, his terror shrouds
  In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds:
  Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours
  With voice divine, from Ilion's topmost towers:
  Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill;
  The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.

  Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls,
  And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.
  Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground;
  The forests wave, the mountains nod around;
  Through all their summits tremble Ida's woods,
  And from their sources boil her hundred floods.
  Troy's turrets totter on the rocking plain,
  And the toss'd navies beat the heaving main.
  Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,(260)
  The infernal monarch rear'd his horrid head,
  Leap'd from his throne, lest Neptune's arm should lay
  His dark dominions open to the day,
  And pour in light on Pluto's drear abodes,
  Abhorr'd by men, and dreadful even to gods.(261)

              [Illustration: THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.]

                      THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.


  Such war the immortals wage; such horrors rend
  The world's vast concave, when the gods contend
  First silver-shafted Phoebus took the plain
  Against blue Neptune, monarch of the main.
  The god of arms his giant bulk display'd,
  Opposed to Pallas, war's triumphant maid.
  Against Latona march'd the son of May.
  The quiver'd Dian, sister of the day,
  (Her golden arrows sounding at her side,)
  Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
  With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands
  The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands;
  Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth,
  But called Scamander by the sons of earth.

  While thus the gods in various league engage,
  Achilles glow'd with more than mortal rage:
  Hector he sought; in search of Hector turn'd
  His eyes around, for Hector only burn'd;
  And burst like lightning through the ranks, and vow'd
  To glut the god of battles with his blood.

  Ãneas was the first who dared to stay;
  Apollo wedged him in the warrior's way,
  But swell'd his bosom with undaunted might,
  Half-forced and half-persuaded to the fight.
  Like young Lycaon, of the royal line,
  In voice and aspect, seem'd the power divine;
  And bade the chief reflect, how late with scorn
  In distant threats he braved the goddess-born.

  Then thus the hero of Anchises' strain:
  "To meet Pelides you persuade in vain:
  Already have I met, nor void of fear
  Observed the fury of his flying spear;
  From Ida's woods he chased us to the field,
  Our force he scattered, and our herds he kill'd;
  Lyrnessus, Pedasus in ashes lay;
  But (Jove assisting) I survived the day:
  Else had I sunk oppress'd in fatal fight
  By fierce Achilles and Minerva's might.
  Where'er he moved, the goddess shone before,
  And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.
  What mortal man Achilles can sustain?
  The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain,
  And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
  Were God my aid, this arm should check his power,
  Though strong in battle as a brazen tower."

  To whom the son of Jove: "That god implore,
  And be what great Achilles was before.
  From heavenly Venus thou deriv'st thy strain,
  And he but from a sister of the main;
  An aged sea-god father of his line;
  But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
  Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow,
  Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe."

  This said, and spirit breathed into his breast,
  Through the thick troops the embolden'd hero press'd:
  His venturous act the white-arm'd queen survey'd,
  And thus, assembling all the powers, she said:

  "Behold an action, gods! that claims your care,
  Lo great Ãneas rushing to the war!
  Against Pelides he directs his course,
  Phoebus impels, and Phoebus gives him force.
  Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend
  Our favour'd hero, let some power descend.
  To guard his life, and add to his renown,
  We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
  Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
  That spun so short his life's illustrious line:(262)
  But lest some adverse god now cross his way,
  Give him to know what powers assist this day:
  For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,
  When heaven's refulgent host appear in arms?"(263)

  Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Against the might of man, so feeble known,
  Why should celestial powers exert their own?
  Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,
  And leave to war the fates of mortal men.
  But if the armipotent, or god of light,
  Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight.
  Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend:
  Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;
  And these, in ruin and confusion hurl'd,
  Yield to our conquering arms the lower world."

  Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea,
  Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
  Advanced upon the field there stood a mound
  Of earth congested, wall'd, and trench'd around;
  In elder times to guard Alcides made,
  (The work of Trojans, with Minerva's aid,)
  What time a vengeful monster of the main
  Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain.

  Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair,
  With clouds encompass'd, and a veil of air:
  The adverse powers, around Apollo laid,
  Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade.
  In circle close each heavenly party sat,
  Intent to form the future scheme of fate;
  But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high
  Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply.

  Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground;
  The trampled centre yields a hollow sound:
  Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright,
  The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.
  Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear,
  There great Achilles; bold Ãneas, here.
  With towering strides Aeneas first advanced;
  The nodding plumage on his helmet danced:
  Spread o'er his breast the fencing shield he bore,
  And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before.
  Not so Pelides; furious to engage,
  He rush'd impetuous. Such the lion's rage,
  Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes,
  Though all in arms the peopled city rise,
  Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride;
  Till at the length, by some brave youth defied,
  To his bold spear the savage turns alone,
  He murmurs fury with a hollow groan;
  He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes around
  Lash'd by his tail his heaving sides resound;
  He calls up all his rage; he grinds his teeth,
  Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death.
  So fierce Achilles on Ãneas flies;
  So stands Ãneas, and his force defies.
  Ere yet the stern encounter join'd, begun
  The seed of Thetis thus to Venus' son:

  "Why comes Ãneas through the ranks so far?
  Seeks he to meet Achilles' arm in war,
  In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy,
  And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?
  Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies,
  The partial monarch may refuse the prize;
  Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell:
  And 'tis his fault to love those sons too well,
  Or, in reward of thy victorious hand,
  Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land
  An ample forest, or a fair domain,
  Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?
  Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.
  But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
  Once (as I think) you saw this brandish'd spear
  And then the great Ãneas seem'd to fear:
  With hearty haste from Ida's mount he fled,
  Nor, till he reach'd Lyrnessus, turn'd his head.
  Her lofty walls not long our progress stay'd;
  Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid:
  In Grecian chains her captive race were cast;
  'Tis true, the great Aeneas fled too fast.
  Defrauded of my conquest once before,
  What then I lost, the gods this day restore.
  Go; while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
  Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

  To this Anchises' son: "Such words employ
  To one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy;
  Such we disdain; the best may be defied
  With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;
  Unworthy the high race from which we came
  Proclaim'd so loudly by the voice of fame:
  Each from illustrious fathers draws his line;
  Each goddess-born; half human, half divine.
  Thetis' this day, or Venus' offspring dies,
  And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes:
  For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,
  'Tis not in words the glorious strife can end.
  If yet thou further seek to learn my birth
  (A tale resounded through the spacious earth)
  Hear how the glorious origin we prove
  From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
  Dardania's walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
  (The city since of many-languaged men,)
  Was not. The natives were content to till
  The shady foot of Ida's fountful hill.(264)
  From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs,
  The richest, once, of Asia's wealthy kings;
  Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred,
  Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
  Boreas, enamour'd of the sprightly train,
  Conceal'd his godhead in a flowing mane,
  With voice dissembled to his loves he neigh'd,
  And coursed the dappled beauties o'er the mead:
  Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall'd kind,
  Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
  These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,
  Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;
  And when along the level seas they flew,(265)
  Scarce on the surface curl'd the briny dew.
  Such Erichthonius was: from him there came
  The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
  Three sons renown'd adorn'd his nuptial bed,
  Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
  The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
  Whom heaven, enamour'd, snatch'd to upper air,
  To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest,
  The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
  The two remaining sons the line divide:
  First rose Laomedon from Ilus' side;
  From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old,
  And Priam, bless'd with Hector, brave and bold;
  Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour'd pair;
  And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war.
  From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he
  Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
  Such is our race: 'tis fortune gives us birth,
  But Jove alone endues the soul with worth:
  He, source of power and might! with boundless sway,
  All human courage gives, or takes away.
  Long in the field of words we may contend,
  Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
  Arm'd or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;
  So voluble a weapon is the tongue;
  Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
  For every man has equal strength to rail:
  Women alone, when in the streets they jar,
  Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;
  Like us they stand, encompass'd with the crowd,
  And vent their anger impotent and loud.
  Cease then--Our business in the field of fight
  Is not to question, but to prove our might.
  To all those insults thou hast offer'd here,
  Receive this answer: 'tis my flying spear."

  He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung,
  Fix'd deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
  Far on his outstretch'd arm, Pelides held
  (To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield,
  That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear
  Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
  His fears were vain; impenetrable charms
  Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
  Through two strong plates the point its passage held,
  But stopp'd, and rested, by the third repell'd.
  Five plates of various metal, various mould,
  Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,
  Of tin each inward, and the middle gold:
  There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw,
  The forceful spear of great Achilles flew,
  And pierced the Dardan shield's extremest bound,
  Where the shrill brass return'd a sharper sound:
  Through the thin verge the Pelean weapon glides,
  And the slight covering of expanded hides.
  Ãneas his contracted body bends,
  And o'er him high the riven targe extends,
  Sees, through its parting plates, the upper air,
  And at his back perceives the quivering spear:
  A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright;
  And swims before his eyes the many-colour'd light.
  Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries,
  Draws his broad blade, and at Ãneas flies:
  Ãneas rousing as the foe came on,
  With force collected, heaves a mighty stone:
  A mass enormous! which in modern days
  No two of earth's degenerate sons could raise.
  But ocean's god, whose earthquakes rock the ground.
  Saw the distress, and moved the powers around:

  "Lo! on the brink of fate Ãneas stands,
  An instant victim to Achilles' hands;
  By Phoebus urged; but Phoebus has bestow'd
  His aid in vain: the man o'erpowers the god.
  And can ye see this righteous chief atone
  With guiltless blood for vices not his own?
  To all the gods his constant vows were paid;
  Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid.
  Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign
  The future father of the Dardan line:(266)
  The first great ancestor obtain'd his grace,
  And still his love descends on all the race:
  For Priam now, and Priam's faithless kind,
  At length are odious to the all-seeing mind;
  On great Ãneas shall devolve the reign,
  And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain."

  The great earth-shaker thus: to whom replies
  The imperial goddess with the radiant eyes:
  "Good as he is, to immolate or spare
  The Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care;
  Pallas and I, by all that gods can bind,
  Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind;
  Not even an instant to protract their fate,
  Or save one member of the sinking state;
  Till her last flame be quench'd with her last gore,
  And even her crumbling ruins are no more."

  The king of ocean to the fight descends,
  Through all the whistling darts his course he bends,
  Swift interposed between the warrior flies,
  And casts thick darkness o'er Achilles' eyes.(267)
  From great Ãneas' shield the spear he drew,
  And at his master's feet the weapon threw.
  That done, with force divine he snatch'd on high
  The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky,
  Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads
  Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds:
  Till at the battle's utmost verge they light,
  Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.
  The godhead there (his heavenly form confess'd)
  With words like these the panting chief address'd:

  "What power, O prince! with force inferior far,
  Urged thee to meet Achilles' arm in war?
  Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom,
  Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
  But when the day decreed (for come it must)
  Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust,
  Let then the furies of that arm be known,
  Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own."

  With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
  Then from Achilles chased the mist away:
  Sudden, returning with a stream of light,
  The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
  Then thus, amazed; "What wonders strike my mind!
  My spear, that parted on the wings of wind,
  Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,
  That fell this instant, vanish'd from my sword!
  I thought alone with mortals to contend,
  But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
  Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,
  Content for once, with all his gods, to fly.
  Now then let others bleed." This said, aloud
  He vents his fury and inflames the crowd:
  "O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)
  Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
  'Tis not in me, though favour'd by the sky,
  To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:
  No god can singly such a host engage,
  Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva's rage.
  But whatsoe'er Achilles can inspire,
  Whate'er of active force, or acting fire;
  Whate'er this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
  All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
  Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
  And thin the squadrons with my single spear."

  He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
  The godlike Hector warm'd the troops of Troy:
  "Trojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;
  Nor dread the vaunts of Peleus' haughty son.
  Deeds must decide our fate. E'en these with words
  Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords:
  The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies,
  But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
  Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire,
  Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire;
  That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,
  And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand."

  Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;
  A wood of lances rises round his head,
  Clamours on clamours tempest all the air,
  They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
  But Phoebus warns him from high heaven to shun
  The single fight with Thetis' godlike son;
  More safe to combat in the mingled band,
  Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand.
  He hears, obedient to the god of light,
  And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight.

  Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies,
  On Troy's whole force with boundless fury flies.
  First falls Iphytion, at his army's head;
  Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led;
  From great Otrynteus he derived his blood,
  His mother was a Nais, of the flood;
  Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crown'd with snow,
  From Hyde's walls he ruled the lands below.
  Fierce as he springs, the sword his head divides:
  The parted visage falls on equal sides:
  With loud-resounding arms he strikes the plain;
  While thus Achilles glories o'er the slain:

  "Lie there, Otryntides! the Trojan earth
  Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy birth;
  Those beauteous fields where Hyllus' waves are roll'd,
  And plenteous Hermus swells with tides of gold,
  Are thine no more."--The insulting hero said,
  And left him sleeping in eternal shade.
  The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore,
  And dash'd their axles with no vulgar gore.

  Demoleon next, Antenor's offspring, laid
  Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
  The impatient steel with full-descending sway
  Forced through his brazen helm its furious way,
  Resistless drove the batter'd skull before,
  And dash'd and mingled all the brains with gore.
  This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,
  Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight:
  The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound
  The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
  He groans away his soul: not louder roars,
  At Neptune's shrine on Helice's high shores,
  The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,
  And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
  Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,(268)
  The youngest hope of Priam's stooping age:
  (Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpass'd:)
  Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
  To the forbidden field he takes his flight,
  In the first folly of a youthful knight,
  To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain,
  But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:
  Struck where the crossing belts unite behind,
  And golden rings the double back-plate join'd
  Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;
  And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell;
  The rushing entrails pour'd upon the ground
  His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round.
  When Hector view'd, all ghastly in his gore,
  Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,
  A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight,
  His soul no longer brook'd the distant fight:
  Full in Achilles' dreadful front he came,
  And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
  The son of Peleus sees, with joy possess'd,
  His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
  "And, lo! the man on whom black fates attend;
  The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
  No more shall Hector's and Pelides' spear
  Turn from each other in the walks of war."--
  Then with revengeful eyes he scann'd him o'er:
  "Come, and receive thy fate!" He spake no more.

  Hector, undaunted, thus: "Such words employ
  To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:
  Such we could give, defying and defied,
  Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride!
  I know thy force to mine superior far;
  But heaven alone confers success in war:
  Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart,
  And give it entrance in a braver heart."

  Then parts the lance: but Pallas' heavenly breath
  Far from Achilles wafts the winged death:
  The bidden dart again to Hector flies,
  And at the feet of its great master lies.
  Achilles closes with his hated foe,
  His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow:
  But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds
  The favour'd hero in a veil of clouds.
  Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart,
  Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart;
  The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud.
  He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud:

  "Wretch! thou hast 'scaped again; once more thy flight
  Has saved thee, and the partial god of light.
  But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand,
  If any power assist Achilles' hand.
  Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day
  Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay."

  With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain:
  Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain,
  Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there,
  And stopp'd Demuchus, great Philetor's heir.
  Gigantic chief! deep gash'd the enormous blade,
  And for the soul an ample passage made.
  Laoganus and Dardanus expire,
  The valiant sons of an unhappy sire;
  Both in one instant from the chariot hurl'd,
  Sunk in one instant to the nether world:
  This difference only their sad fates afford
  That one the spear destroy'd, and one the sword.

  Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds;
  In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads;
  In vain he begs thee, with a suppliant's moan,
  To spare a form, an age so like thy own!
  Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art,
  E'er bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
  While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried,
  The ruthless falchion oped his tender side;
  The panting liver pours a flood of gore
  That drowns his bosom till he pants no more.

  Through Mulius' head then drove the impetuous spear:
  The warrior falls, transfix'd from ear to ear.
  Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves,
  Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves;
  Warm'd in the brain the smoking weapon lies,
  The purple death comes floating o'er his eyes.
  Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung
  Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung;
  He dropp'd his arm, an unassisting weight,
  And stood all impotent, expecting fate:
  Full on his neck the falling falchion sped,
  From his broad shoulders hew'd his crested head:
  Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies,
  And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.
  Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came,
  (The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,)
  Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends;
  Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.
  The squire, who saw expiring on the ground
  His prostrate master, rein'd the steeds around;
  His back, scarce turn'd, the Pelian javelin gored,
  And stretch'd the servant o'er his dying lord.
  As when a flame the winding valley fills,
  And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills;
  Then o'er the stubble up the mountain flies,
  Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
  This way and that, the spreading torrent roars:
  So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;
  Around him wide, immense destruction pours
  And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers
  As with autumnal harvests cover'd o'er,
  And thick bestrewn, lies Ceres' sacred floor;
  When round and round, with never-wearied pain,
  The trampling steers beat out the unnumber'd grain:
  So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,
  Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroes' souls,
  Dash'd from their hoofs while o'er the dead they fly,
  Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:
  The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore;
  And thick the groaning axles dropp'd with gore.
  High o'er the scene of death Achilles stood,
  All grim with dust, all horrible in blood:
  Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;
  Such is the lust of never-dying fame!

                         [Illustration: CENTAUR.]

                                 CENTAUR.





BOOK XXI.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.(269)

The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the
river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and kills
Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves: Neptune
and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length Vulcan, by
the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This Combat ended, the
other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles continues the slaughter,
drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a stand, and is conveyed away
in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor's
shape, and while he pursues him in that disguise, gives the Trojans an
opportunity of retiring into their city.

The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream of
Scamander.

  And now to Xanthus' gliding stream they drove,
  Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
  The river here divides the flying train,
  Part to the town fly diverse o'er the plain,
  Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,
  Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
  (These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds,
  And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)
  Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars,
  The flashing billows beat the whiten'd shores:
  With cries promiscuous all the banks resound,
  And here, and there, in eddies whirling round,
  The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drown'd.
  As the scorch'd locusts from their fields retire,
  While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire;
  Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,
  The clustering legions rush into the flood:
  So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles' force,
  Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
  His bloody lance the hero casts aside,
  (Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,)
  Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,
  Arm'd with his sword, high brandish'd o'er the waves:
  Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
  Deep groan'd the waters with the dying sound;
  Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed,
  And the warm purple circled on the tide.
  Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly,
  And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:
  So the huge dolphin tempesting the main,
  In shoals before him fly the scaly train,
  Confusedly heap'd they seek their inmost caves,
  Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
  Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
  Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
  With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
  (Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
  These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
  Sad victims destined to Patroclus' shade;

  Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
  The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
  The son of Priam; whom the hero's hand
  But late made captive in his father's land
  (As from a sycamore, his sounding steel
  Lopp'd the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel)
  To Lemnos' isle he sold the royal slave,
  Where Jason's son the price demanded gave;
  But kind Eetion, touching on the shore,
  The ransom'd prince to fair Arisbe bore.
  Ten days were past, since in his father's reign
  He felt the sweets of liberty again;
  The next, that god whom men in vain withstand
  Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand
  Now never to return! and doom'd to go
  A sadder journey to the shades below.
  His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,
  (The helm and visor he had cast aside
  With wild affright, and dropp'd upon the field
  His useless lance and unavailing shield,)
  As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,
  And knock'd his faltering knees, the hero said.
  "Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
  Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
  Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans kill'd
  Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field;
  As now the captive, whom so late I bound
  And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!
  Not him the sea's unmeasured deeps detain,
  That bar such numbers from their native plain;
  Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!
  Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer;
  If earth, at length this active prince can seize,
  Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules."

  Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears
  Approach'd, and sought his knees with suppliant tears
  Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath,
  And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
  Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;
  He kiss'd his feet, extended on the ground:
  And while, above, the spear suspended stood,
  Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood,
  One hand embraced them close, one stopp'd the dart,
  While thus these melting words attempt his heart:

  "Thy well-known captive, great Achilles! see,
  Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.
  Some pity to a suppliant's name afford,
  Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board;
  Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore,
  Far from his father, friends, and native shore;
  A hundred oxen were his price that day,
  Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.
  Scarce respited from woes I yet appear,
  And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here;
  Lo! Jove again submits me to thy hands,
  Again, her victim cruel Fate demands!
  I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair,
  (Old Altes' daughter, and Lelegia's heir;
  Who held in Pedasus his famed abode,
  And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flow'd,)
  Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore;
  For ah! one spear shall drink each brother's gore,
  And I succeed to slaughter'd Polydore.
  How from that arm of terror shall I fly?
  Some demon urges! 'tis my doom to die!
  If ever yet soft pity touch'd thy mind,
  Ah! think not me too much of Hector's kind!
  Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath,
  With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus' death."

  These words, attended with a shower of tears,
  The youth address'd to unrelenting ears:
  "Talk not of life, or ransom (he replies):
  Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
  In vain a single Trojan sues for grace;
  But least, the sons of Priam's hateful race.
  Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?
  The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
  He, far thy better, was foredoom'd to die,
  And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
  Seest thou not me, whom nature's gifts adorn,
  Sprung from a hero, from a goddess born?
  The day shall come (which nothing can avert)
  When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart,
  By night, or day, by force, or by design,
  Impending death and certain fate are mine!
  Die then,"--He said; and as the word he spoke,
  The fainting stripling sank before the stroke:
  His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear,
  While all his trembling frame confess'd his fear:
  Sudden, Achilles his broad sword display'd,
  And buried in his neck the reeking blade.
  Prone fell the youth; and panting on the land,
  The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand.
  The victor to the stream the carcase gave,
  And thus insults him, floating on the wave:

  "Lie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround
  Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound:
  There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep,
  But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep,
  Whose every wave some watery monster brings,
  To feast unpunish'd on the fat of kings.
  So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line!
  Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
  What boots ye now Scamander's worshipp'd stream,
  His earthly honours, and immortal name?
  In vain your immolated bulls are slain,
  Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
  Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate;
  Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete:
  Thus is atoned Patroclus' honour'd shade,
  And the short absence of Achilles paid."

  These boastful words provoked the raging god;
  With fury swells the violated flood.
  What means divine may yet the power employ
  To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
  Meanwhile the hero springs in arms, to dare
  The great Asteropeus to mortal war;
  The son of Pelagon, whose lofty line
  Flows from the source of Axius, stream divine!
  (Fair Peribaea's love the god had crown'd,
  With all his refluent waters circled round:)
  On him Achilles rush'd; he fearless stood,
  And shook two spears, advancing from the flood;
  The flood impell'd him, on Pelides' head
  To avenge his waters choked with heaps of dead.
  Near as they drew, Achilles thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sire
  Whose son encounters our resistless ire."

  "O son of Peleus! what avails to trace
  (Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
  From rich Paeonia's valleys I command,
  Arm'd with protended spears, my native band;
  Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
  In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
  Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floated region fills,
  Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
  Now lift thy arm, and try that hero's son!"

  Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
  At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
  (For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
  One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
  One razed Achilles' hand; the spouting blood
  Spun forth; in earth the fasten'd weapon stood.
  Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
  Its erring fury hiss'd along the skies;
  Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
  Even to the middle earth; and quiver'd there.
  Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
  And on his foe with double fury flew.
  The foe thrice tugg'd, and shook the rooted wood;
  Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
  The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
  Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
  His belly open'd with a ghastly wound,
  The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
  Beneath the hero's feet he panting lies,
  And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
  While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
  His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

  "So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
  Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
  Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
  But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
  How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
  Of Peleus, Ãacus, and Jove, am I.
  The race of these superior far to those,
  As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
  What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
  But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
  Even Achelous might contend in vain,
  And all the roaring billows of the main.
  The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow
  The seas, the rivers, and the springs below,
  The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear,
  And in his deep abysses shakes with fear."

  He said: then from the bank his javelin tore,
  And left the breathless warrior in his gore.
  The floating tides the bloody carcase lave,
  And beat against it, wave succeeding wave;
  Till, roll'd between the banks, it lies the food
  Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood.
  All scatter'd round the stream (their mightiest slain)
  The amazed Paeonians scour along the plain;
  He vents his fury on the flying crew,
  Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew;
  Mydon, Thersilochus, with Ãnius, fell;
  And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell,
  But from the bottom of his gulfs profound
  Scamander spoke; the shores return'd the sound.

  "O first of mortals! (for the gods are thine)
  In valour matchless, and in force divine!
  If Jove have given thee every Trojan head,
  'Tis not on me thy rage should heap the dead.
  See! my choked streams no more their course can keep,
  Nor roll their wonted tribute to the deep.
  Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood;
  Content, thy slaughters could amaze a god."

  In human form, confess'd before his eyes,
  The river thus; and thus the chief replies:
  "O sacred stream! thy word we shall obey;
  But not till Troy the destined vengeance pay,
  Not till within her towers the perjured train
  Shall pant, and tremble at our arms again;
  Not till proud Hector, guardian of her wall,
  Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall."

  He said; and drove with fury on the foe.
  Then to the godhead of the silver bow
  The yellow flood began: "O son of Jove!
  Was not the mandate of the sire above
  Full and express, that Phoebus should employ
  His sacred arrows in defence of Troy,
  And make her conquer, till Hyperion's fall
  In awful darkness hide the face of all?"

  He spoke in vain--The chief without dismay
  Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.
  Then rising in his rage above the shores,
  From all his deep the bellowing river roars,
  Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast,
  And round the banks the ghastly dead are toss'd.
  While all before, the billows ranged on high,
  (A watery bulwark,) screen the bands who fly.
  Now bursting on his head with thundering sound,
  The falling deluge whelms the hero round:
  His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide;
  His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide,
  Sliddering, and staggering. On the border stood
  A spreading elm, that overhung the flood;
  He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
  The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.(270)
  Heaving the bank, and undermining all;
  Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall
  Of the thick foliage. The large trunk display'd
  Bridged the rough flood across: the hero stay'd
  On this his weight, and raised upon his hand,
  Leap'd from the channel, and regain'd the land.
  Then blacken'd the wild waves: the murmur rose:
  The god pursues, a huger billow throws,
  And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy
  The man whose fury is the fate of Troy.
  He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace
  (Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race);
  Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs;
  At every bound his clanging armour rings:
  Now here, now there, he turns on every side,
  And winds his course before the following tide;
  The waves flow after, wheresoe'er he wheels,
  And gather fast, and murmur at his heels.
  So when a peasant to his garden brings
  Soft rills of water from the bubbling springs,
  And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers,
  And feed with pregnant streams the plants and flowers:
  Soon as he clears whate'er their passage stay'd,
  And marks the future current with his spade,
  Swift o'er the rolling pebbles, down the hills,
  Louder and louder purl the falling rills;
  Before him scattering, they prevent his pains,
  And shine in mazy wanderings o'er the plains.

  Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes
  Still swift Scamander rolls where'er he flies:
  Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods;
  The first of men, but not a match for gods.
  Oft as he turn'd the torrent to oppose,
  And bravely try if all the powers were foes;
  So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread,
  Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head.
  Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves,
  And still indignant bounds above the waves.
  Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil;
  Wash'd from beneath him slides the slimy soil;
  When thus (his eyes on heaven's expansion thrown)
  Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan:

  "Is there no god Achilles to befriend,
  No power to avert his miserable end?
  Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,(271)
  And make my future life the sport of fate.
  Of all heaven's oracles believed in vain,
  But most of Thetis must her son complain;
  By Phoebus' darts she prophesied my fall,
  In glorious arms before the Trojan wall.
  Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm,
  Stretch'd like a hero, by a hero's arm!
  Might Hector's spear this dauntless bosom rend,
  And my swift soul o'ertake my slaughter'd friend.
  Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate,
  Oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
  Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day,
  Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away,
  An unregarded carcase to the sea."

  Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,
  And thus in human form address'd the chief:
  The power of ocean first: "Forbear thy fear,
  O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear!
  Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,
  Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
  Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
  'Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
  But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
  Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
  Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
  Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
  Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
  And Hector's blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
  Thine is the glory doom'd." Thus spake the gods:
  Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

  Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell'd,
  He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
  O'er all the expanded plain the waters spread;
  Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
  Floating 'midst scatter'd arms; while casques of gold
  And turn'd-up bucklers glitter'd as they roll'd.
  High o'er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds,
  He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
  Not a whole river stops the hero's course,
  While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
  With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
  And lifts his billows, and o'erwhelms his shores.

  Then thus to Simois! "Haste, my brother flood;
  And check this mortal that controls a god;
  Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,
  And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
  Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,
  From all thy fountains swell thy watery store,
  With broken rocks, and with a load of dead,
  Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
  Mark how resistless through the floods he goes,
  And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
  But nor that force, nor form divine to sight,
  Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:
  Whelm'd under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,
  That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye;
  And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl'd,
  Immersed remain this terror of the world.
  Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,
  No Greeks shall e'er his perish'd relics grace,
  No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;
  These his cold rites, and this his watery tomb."

           [Illustration: ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.]

                   ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.


  He said; and on the chief descends amain,
  Increased with gore, and swelling with the slain.
  Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves,
  And a foam whitens on the purple waves:
  At every step, before Achilles stood
  The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood.
  Fear touch'd the queen of heaven: she saw dismay'd,
  She call'd aloud, and summon'd Vulcan's aid.

  "Rise to the war! the insulting flood requires
  Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!
  While to their aid, by our command enjoin'd,
  Rush the swift eastern and the western wind:
  These from old ocean at my word shall blow,
  Pour the red torrent on the watery foe,
  Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn,
  And hissing rivers to their bottoms burn.
  Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power,
  Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
  Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim)
  Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!"

  The power ignipotent her word obeys:
  Wide o'er the plain he pours the boundless blaze;
  At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil
  And the shrunk waters in their channel boil.
  As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky,
  And instant blows the water'd gardens dry:
  So look'd the field, so whiten'd was the ground,
  While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.
  Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys;
  Along the margin winds the running blaze:
  The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn,
  The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn,
  Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire;
  The watery willows hiss before the fire.
  Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath,
  The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death:
  Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,
  Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
  At length the river rear'd his languid head,
  And thus, short-panting, to the god he said:

  "Oh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?
  I faint, I sink, unequal to the fight--
  I yield--Let Ilion fall; if fate decree--
  Ah--bend no more thy fiery arms on me!"

  He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round;
  The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
  As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,(272)
  To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,
  Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires
  The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:
  So boils the imprison'd flood, forbid to flow,
  And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
  To Juno then, imperial queen of air,
  The burning river sends his earnest prayer:

  "Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engage
  Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
  On other gods his dreadful arm employ,
  For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
  Submissive I desist, if thou command;
  But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
  Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate
  Unaided Ilion, and her destined state,
  Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,
  And in one ruin sink the Trojan name."

  His warm entreaty touch'd Saturnia's ear:
  She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear,
  Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause
  Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws:
  Again the branching streams begin to spread,
  And soft remurmur in their wonted bed.

  While these by Juno's will the strife resign,
  The warring gods in fierce contention join:
  Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms:
  With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:
  Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound;
  And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
  Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,
  And views contending gods with careless eyes.
  The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,
  And first assaults the radiant queen of war:

  "What moved thy madness, thus to disunite
  Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
  What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood
  Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god?
  Thy impious hand Tydides' javelin bore,
  And madly bathed it in celestial gore."

  He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield,
  Which bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful field:
  The adamantine aegis of her sire,
  That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.

  Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand
  A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land,
  There fix'd from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;
  This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
  Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:
  And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
  The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:
  Loud o'er the fields his ringing arms resound:
  The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles,
  And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:

  "Hast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known
  How far Minerva's force transcends thy own?
  Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand,
  Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas' hand;
  Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace,
  And partial aid to Troy's perfidious race."

  The goddess spoke, and turn'd her eyes away,
  That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
  Jove's Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,
  Lent to the wounded god her tender hand:
  Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,
  And, propp'd on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
  This the bright empress of the heavens survey'd,
  And, scoffing, thus to war's victorious maid:

  "Lo! what an aid on Mars's side is seen!
  The smiles' and loves' unconquerable queen!
  Mark with what insolence, in open view,
  She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue."

  Minerva smiling heard, the pair o'ertook,
  And slightly on her breast the wanton strook:
  She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled);
  On earth together lay the lovers spread.
  "And like these heroes be the fate of all
  (Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan wall!
  To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be,
  So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me;
  Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved."
  Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved.

  Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight,
  The god of ocean dares the god of light.
  "What sloth has seized us, when the fields around
  Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound:
  Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire,
  No deed perform'd, to our Olympian sire?
  Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage,
  Suits not my greatness, or superior age:
  Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne,
  (Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,)
  And guard the race of proud Laomedon!
  Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarch's prayer,
  We shared the lengthen'd labours of a year?
  Troy walls I raised (for such were Jove's commands),
  And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:
  Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves
  Along fair Ida's vales and pendant groves.
  But when the circling seasons in their train
  Brought back the grateful day that crown'd our pain,
  With menace stern the fraudful king defied
  Our latent godhead, and the prize denied:
  Mad as he was, he threaten'd servile bands,
  And doom'd us exiles far in barbarous lands.(273)
  Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing,
  And destined vengeance on the perjured king.
  Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace,
  And not, like us, infest the faithless race;
  Like us, their present, future sons destroy,
  And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?"

  Apollo thus: "To combat for mankind
  Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind;
  For what is man? Calamitous by birth,
  They owe their life and nourishment to earth;
  Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown'd,
  Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
  To their own hands commit the frantic scene,
  Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean."

  Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires,
  And from the senior power submiss retires:
  Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
  The quiver'd huntress of the sylvan shades:

  "And is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies,
  And yields to ocean's hoary sire the prize?
  How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show
  Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
  Now boast no more in yon celestial bower,
  Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power."

  Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid:
  Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:
  But furious thus: "What insolence has driven
  Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
  What though by Jove the female plague design'd,
  Fierce to the feeble race of womankind,
  The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;
  Thy sex's tyrant, with a tiger's heart?
  What though tremendous in the woodland chase
  Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
  How dares thy rashness on the powers divine
  Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
  Learn hence, no more unequal war to wage--"
  She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;
  These in her left hand lock'd, her right untied
  The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
  About her temples flies the busy bow;
  Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
  The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
  Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
  Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
  And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
  So, when the falcon wings her way above,
  To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove;
  (Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,
  Yet still her heart against the marble beats.

  To her Latona hastes with tender care;
  Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war:
  "How shall I face the dame, who gives delight
  To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
  Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies,
  And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize."

  He spoke; and pass'd: Latona, stooping low,
  Collects the scatter'd shafts and fallen bow,
  That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there
  Dishonour'd relics of Diana's war:
  Then swift pursued her to her blest abode,
  Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god;
  Weeping, she grasp'd his knees: the ambrosial vest
  Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast.

  The sire superior smiled, and bade her show
  What heavenly hand had caused his daughter's woe?
  Abash'd, she names his own imperial spouse;
  And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.

  Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down,
  Apollo enters Ilion's sacred town;
  The guardian-god now trembled for her wall,
  And fear'd the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.
  Back to Olympus, from the war's alarms,
  Return the shining bands of gods in arms;
  Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire;
  And take their thrones around the ethereal sire.

  Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,
  O'er slaughter'd heroes, and o'er rolling steeds.
  As when avenging flames with fury driven
  On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven;
  The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly;
  And the red vapours purple all the sky:
  So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay,
  And toils, and terrors, fill'd the dreadful day.

  High on a turret hoary Priam stands,
  And marks the waste of his destructive hands;
  Views, from his arm, the Trojans' scatter'd flight,
  And the near hero rising on his sight!
  No stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace,
  And settled sorrow on his aged face,
  Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls;
  And thus descending, on the guards he calls:

  "You to whose care our city-gates belong,
  Set wide your portals to the flying throng:
  For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway;
  He comes, and desolation marks his way!
  But when within the walls our troops take breath,
  Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death."
  Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung
  The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.
  Phoebus rush'd forth, the flying bands to meet;
  Struck slaughter back, and cover'd the retreat,
  On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate,
  And gladsome see their last escape from fate.
  Thither, all parch'd with thirst, a heartless train,
  Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain:
  And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on
  With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town.
  Enraged Achilles follows with his spear;
  Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.

  Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired,
  And Troy inglorious to her walls retired;
  But he, the god who darts ethereal flame,
  Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame:
  To young Agenor force divine he gave;
  (Antenor's offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;)
  In aid of him, beside the beech he sate,
  And wrapt in clouds, restrain'd the hand of fate.
  When now the generous youth Achilles spies.
  Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise.
  (So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.)
  He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul;

  "What, shall I fly this terror of the plain!
  Like others fly, and be like others slain?
  Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road
  Yon line of slaughter'd Trojans lately trod.
  No: with the common heap I scorn to fall--
  What if they pass'd me to the Trojan wall,
  While I decline to yonder path, that leads
  To Ida's forests and surrounding shades?
  So may I reach, conceal'd, the cooling flood,
  From my tired body wash the dirt and blood,
  As soon as night her dusky veil extends,
  Return in safety to my Trojan friends.
  What if?--But wherefore all this vain debate?
  Stand I to doubt, within the reach of fate?
  Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall,
  The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall:
  Such is his swiftness, 'tis in vain to fly,
  And such his valour, that who stands must die.
  Howe'er 'tis better, fighting for the state,
  Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
  Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel
  (Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel.
  One only soul informs that dreadful frame:
  And Jove's sole favour gives him all his fame."

  He said, and stood, collected, in his might;
  And all his beating bosom claim'd the fight.
  So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts,
  Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:
  Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds
  Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;
  Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;
  And the barb'd javelin stings his breast in vain:
  On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;
  And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
  Not less resolved, Antenor's valiant heir
  Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war,
  Disdainful of retreat: high held before,
  His shield (a broad circumference) he bore;
  Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
  The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:

  "How proud Achilles glories in his fame!
  And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name
  Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain;
  A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
  Parents and children our just arms employ,
  And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
  Great as thou art, even thou may'st stain with gore
  These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore."

  He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
  Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
  Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
  He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
  Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
  His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
  But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
  The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
  Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
  Dismiss'd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
  Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
  Assumes Agenor's habit, voice and shape,
  Flies from the furious chief in this disguise;
  The furious chief still follows where he flies.
  Now o'er the fields they stretch with lengthen'd strides,
  Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides:
  The god, now distant scarce a stride before,
  Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore;
  While all the flying troops their speed employ,
  And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy:
  No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
  Who 'scaped by flight, or who by battle fell.
  'Twas tumult all, and violence of flight;
  And sudden joy confused, and mix'd affright.
  Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate:
  And nations breathe, deliver'd from their fate.





BOOK XXII.


ARGUMENT.

THE DEATH OF HECTOR.

The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his son
to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain. Hector
consults within himself what measures to take; but at the advance of
Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achilles pursues him
thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning the fate of
Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles. She deludes
Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and is slain.
Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of Priam and
Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries reach the ears
of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into the inner part of
the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds her dead husband. She
swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and lamentation.

The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls, and on
the battlements of Troy.

  Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear,
  The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:
  There safe they wipe the briny drops away,
  And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
  Close to the walls, advancing o'er the fields
  Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields,
  March, bending on, the Greeks' embodied powers,
  Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
  Great Hector singly stay'd: chain'd down by fate
  There fix'd he stood before the Scaean gate;
  Still his bold arms determined to employ,
  The guardian still of long-defended Troy.

  Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:
  (The power confess'd in all his glory burns:)
  "And what (he cries) has Peleus' son in view,
  With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
  For not to thee to know the gods is given,
  Unskill'd to trace the latent marks of heaven.
  What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain?
  Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:
  Safe in their walls are now her troops bestow'd,
  While here thy frantic rage attacks a god."

  The chief incensed--"Too partial god of day!
  To check my conquests in the middle way:
  How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
  What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
  Thou robb'st me of a glory justly mine,
  Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
  Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
  To cheat a mortal who repines in vain."

  Then to the city, terrible and strong,
  With high and haughty steps he tower'd along,
  So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
  To the near goal with double ardour flies.
  Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
  The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
  Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,(274)
  Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
  Orion's dog (the year when autumn weighs),
  And o'er the feebler stars exerts his rays;
  Terrific glory! for his burning breath
  Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
  So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
  He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
  He lifts his wither'd arms; obtests the skies;
  He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
  The son, resolved Achilles' force to dare,
  Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
  While the sad father on the rampart stands,
  And thus adjures him with extended hands:

  "Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
  Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!
  Methinks already I behold thee slain,
  And stretch'd beneath that fury of the plain.
  Implacable Achilles! might'st thou be
  To all the gods no dearer than to me!
  Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore.
  And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
  How many valiant sons I late enjoy'd,
  Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy'd:
  Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles
  To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
  Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,
  Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore,
  And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
  Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live,
  What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!
  (Their grandsire's wealth, by right of birth their own,
  Consign'd his daughter with Lelegia's throne:)
  But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
  All pale they wander on the Stygian coast;
  What sorrows then must their sad mother know,
  What anguish I? unutterable woe!
  Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
  Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
  Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
  And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
  Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
  Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
  Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
  While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
  Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
  (All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
  Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
  The bitter dregs of fortune's cup to drain:
  To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
  And number all his days by miseries!
  My heroes slain, my bridal bed o'erturn'd,
  My daughters ravish'd, and my city burn'd,
  My bleeding infants dash'd against the floor;
  These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
  Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
  The last sad relic of my ruin'd state,
  (Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
  And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
  Where famish'd dogs, late guardians of my door,
  Shall lick their mangled master's spatter'd gore.
  Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! 'tis well;
  Well have they perish'd, for in fight they fell.
  Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
  Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
  But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
  Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
  In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
  And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
  This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
  That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!"

  He said, and acting what no words could say,
  Rent from his head the silver locks away.
  With him the mournful mother bears a part;
  Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector's heart.
  The zone unbraced, her bosom she display'd;
  And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

  "Have mercy on me, O my son! revere
  The words of age; attend a parent's prayer!
  If ever thee in these fond arms I press'd,
  Or still'd thy infant clamours at this breast;
  Ah do not thus our helpless years forego,
  But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
  Against his rage if singly thou proceed,
  Should'st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) should'st thou bleed,
  Nor must thy corse lie honour'd on the bier,
  Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear!
  Far from our pious rites those dear remains
  Must feast the vultures on the naked plains."

  So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll;
  But fix'd remains the purpose of his soul;
  Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance
  Expects the hero's terrible advance.
  So, roll'd up in his den, the swelling snake
  Beholds the traveller approach the brake;
  When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins
  Have gather'd half the poisons of the plains;
  He burns, he stiffens with collected ire,
  And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
  Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined,
  He stood, and question'd thus his mighty mind:(275)

  "Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?
  Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall:
  Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
  Proclaim, his counsels are obey'd too late,
  Which timely follow'd but the former night,
  What numbers had been saved by Hector's flight?
  That wise advice rejected with disdain,
  I feel my folly in my people slain.
  Methinks my suffering country's voice I hear,
  But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
  On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
  And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
  No--if I e'er return, return I must
  Glorious, my country's terror laid in dust:
  Or if I perish, let her see me fall
  In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
  And yet suppose these measures I forego,
  Approach unarm'd, and parley with the foe,
  The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down.
  And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
  The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain'd
  (Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
  With honourable justice to restore:
  And add half Ilion's yet remaining store,
  Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
  May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
  But why this thought? Unarm'd if I should go,
  What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
  But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
  We greet not here, as man conversing man,
  Met at an oak, or journeying o'er a plain;
  No season now for calm familiar talk,
  Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
  War is our business, but to whom is given
  To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!"

  Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
  His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
  The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
  Shot trembling rays that glitter'd o'er the land;
  And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
  Like Jove's own lightning, or the rising sun.
  As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
  Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
  He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
  Achilles follows like the winged wind.
  Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies
  (The swiftest racer of the liquid skies),
  Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,
  Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way,
  With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,
  And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings:
  No less fore-right the rapid chase they held,
  One urged by fury, one by fear impell'd:
  Now circling round the walls their course maintain,
  Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;
  Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,
  (A wider compass,) smoke along the road.
  Next by Scamander's double source they bound,
  Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground;
  This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,
  With exhalations steaming to the skies;
  That the green banks in summer's heat o'erflows,
  Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:
  Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills,
  Whose polish'd bed receives the falling rills;
  Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarm'd by Greece)
  Wash'd their fair garments in the days of peace.(276)
  By these they pass'd, one chasing, one in flight:
  (The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:)
  Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,
  No vulgar victim must reward the day:
  (Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)
  The prize contended was great Hector's life.
  As when some hero's funerals are decreed
  In grateful honour of the mighty dead;
  Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame
  (Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)
  The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal,
  And with them turns the raised spectator's soul:
  Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
  The gazing gods lean forward from the sky;
  To whom, while eager on the chase they look,
  The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

  "Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
  Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
  My heart partakes the generous Hector's pain;
  Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
  Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
  From Ida's summits, and the towers of Troy:
  Now see him flying; to his fears resign'd,
  And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
  Consult, ye powers! ('tis worthy your debate)
  Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
  Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
  (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

  Then Pallas thus: "Shall he whose vengeance forms
  The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
  Shall he prolong one Trojan's forfeit breath?
  A man, a mortal, pre-ordain'd to death!
  And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
  No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?"

  "Go then (return'd the sire) without delay,
  Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.
  Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
  And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

  As through the forest, o'er the vale and lawn,
  The well-breath'd beagle drives the flying fawn,
  In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
  Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
  Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
  The certain hound his various maze pursues.
  Thus step by step, where'er the Trojan wheel'd,
  There swift Achilles compass'd round the field.
  Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
  And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
  (Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
  From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
  So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
  He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
  As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
  One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
  Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
  Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
  No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
  While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

  What god, O muse, assisted Hector's force
  With fate itself so long to hold the course?
  Phoebus it was; who, in his latest hour,
  Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power:
  And great Achilles, lest some Greek's advance
  Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance,
  Sign'd to the troops to yield his foe the way,
  And leave untouch'd the honours of the day.

  Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
  The fates of mortal men, and things below:
  Here each contending hero's lot he tries,
  And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
  Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector's fate;
  Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.

  Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
  To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
  "O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
  And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
  Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
  Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
  Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
  Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
  See, where in vain he supplicates above,
  Roll'd at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
  Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
  And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun."

  Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
  Obey'd; and rested, on his lance reclined
  While like Deiphobus the martial dame
  (Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
  In show an aid, by hapless Hector's side
  Approach'd, and greets him thus with voice belied:

  "Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
  Of this distress, and sorrow'd in thy flight:
  It fits us now a noble stand to make,
  And here, as brothers, equal fates partake."

  Then he: "O prince! allied in blood and fame,
  Dearer than all that own a brother's name;
  Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
  Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more!
  Since you, of all our numerous race alone
  Defend my life, regardless of your own."

  Again the goddess: "Much my father's prayer,
  And much my mother's, press'd me to forbear:
  My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay,
  But stronger love impell'd, and I obey.
  Come then, the glorious conflict let us try,
  Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;
  Or let us stretch Achilles on the field,
  Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield."

  Fraudful she said; then swiftly march'd before:
  The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
  Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke:
  His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:

  "Enough, O son of Peleus! Troy has view'd
  Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
  But now some god within me bids me try
  Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.
  Yet on the verge of battle let us stay,
  And for a moment's space suspend the day;
  Let Heaven's high powers be call'd to arbitrate
  The just conditions of this stern debate,
  (Eternal witnesses of all below,
  And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!)
  To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,
  Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life,
  No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;
  Stripp'd of its arms alone (the conqueror's due)
  The rest to Greece uninjured I'll restore:
  Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more."

  "Talk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies,
  While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes),
  Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
  Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:
  Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine,
  Such leagues as men and furious lions join,
  To such I call the gods! one constant state
  Of lasting rancour and eternal hate:
  No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife,
  Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life.
  Rouse then thy forces this important hour,
  Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
  No further subterfuge, no further chance;
  'Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
  Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,
  Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death."

  He spoke, and launch'd his javelin at the foe;
  But Hector shunn'd the meditated blow:
  He stoop'd, while o'er his head the flying spear
  Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
  Minerva watch'd it falling on the land,
  Then drew, and gave to great Achilles' hand,
  Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
  Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

  "The life you boasted to that javelin given,
  Prince! you have miss'd. My fate depends on Heaven,
  To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
  Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
  Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
  And with false terrors sink another's mind.
  But know, whatever fate I am to try,
  By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
  I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
  My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
  But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
  End all my country's woes, deep buried in thy heart."

  The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
  Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell'd
  The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
  From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
  Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
  Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
  He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear--
  In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
  All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
  "'Tis so--Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
  I deem'd Deiphobus had heard my call,
  But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
  A god deceived me; Pallas, 'twas thy deed,
  Death and black fate approach! 'tis I must bleed.
  No refuge now, no succour from above,
  Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
  Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
  'Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:
  Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
  Let future ages hear it, and admire!"

  Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
  And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
  So Jove's bold bird, high balanced in the air,
  Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
  Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
  Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
  Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
  The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
  Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
  And as he moved, his figure seem'd on flame.
  As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,(277)
  Far-beaming o'er the silver host of night,
  When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
  So shone the point of great Achilles' spear.
  In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
  Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
  But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
  Securely cased the warrior's body o'er.
  One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
  Where 'twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
  Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
  Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
  Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
  Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
  Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
  While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

  "At last is Hector stretch'd upon the plain,
  Who fear'd no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
  Then, prince! you should have fear'd, what now you feel;
  Achilles absent was Achilles still:
  Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
  Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
  Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn'd,
  For ever honour'd, and for ever mourn'd:
  While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
  Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour."

  Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
  "By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
  By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
  Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
  The common rites of sepulture bestow,
  To soothe a father's and a mother's woe:
  Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
  And Hector's ashes in his country rest."

  "No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
  (Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
  Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare,
  Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
  Could I myself the bloody banquet join!
  No--to the dogs that carcase I resign.
  Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store,
  And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
  Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,
  Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame:
  Their Hector on the pile they should not see,
  Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee."

  Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:
  "Thy rage, implacable! too well I knew:
  The Furies that relentless breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.
  Yet think, a day will come, when fate's decree
  And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
  Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
  And stretch thee here before the Scaean gate."(278)

  He ceased. The Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
  And his eyes stiffen'd at the hand of death;
  To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,
  (The manly body left a load of clay,)
  And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Achilles, musing as he roll'd his eyes
  O'er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
  "Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
  I follow thee"--He said, and stripp'd the slain.
  Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
  The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
  The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
  His manly beauty and superior size;
  While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
  With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

  "How changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
  Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatter'd fate!"

  High o'er the slain the great Achilles stands,
  Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
  And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
  "Princes and leaders! countrymen and friends!
  Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
  The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
  Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers!
  See, if already their deserted towers
  Are left unmann'd; or if they yet retain
  The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
  But what is Troy, or glory what to me?
  Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,
  Divine Patroclus! Death hath seal'd his eyes;
  Unwept, unhonour'd, uninterr'd he lies!
  Can his dear image from my soul depart,
  Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?
  If in the melancholy shades below,
  The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,
  Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay'd,
  Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
  Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
  The corpse of Hector, and your paeans sing.
  Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
  "Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more."

  Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;
  (Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;)
  The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound;
  These fix'd up high behind the rolling wain,
  His graceful head was trail'd along the plain.
  Proud on his car the insulting victor stood,
  And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
  He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies;
  The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
  Now lost is all that formidable air;
  The face divine, and long-descending hair,
  Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand;
  Deform'd, dishonour'd, in his native land,
  Given to the rage of an insulting throng,
  And, in his parents' sight, now dragg'd along!

  The mother first beheld with sad survey;
  She rent her tresses, venerable grey,
  And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
  With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans,
  While the sad father answers groans with groans
  Tears after tears his mournful cheeks o'erflow,
  And the whole city wears one face of woe:
  No less than if the rage of hostile fires.
  From her foundations curling to her spires,
  O'er the proud citadel at length should rise,
  And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
  The wretched monarch of the falling state,
  Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
  Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,
  While strong affliction gives the feeble force:
  Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro,
  In all the raging impotence of woe.
  At length he roll'd in dust, and thus begun,
  Imploring all, and naming one by one:
  "Ah! let me, let me go where sorrow calls;
  I, only I, will issue from your walls
  (Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none),
  And bow before the murderer of my son.
  My grief perhaps his pity may engage;
  Perhaps at least he may respect my age.
  He has a father too; a man like me;
  One, not exempt from age and misery
  (Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
  Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
  How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
  Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb!
  Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
  Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
  O had thy gentle spirit pass'd in peace,
  The son expiring in the sire's embrace,
  While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
  And, bending o'er thee, mix'd the tender shower!
  Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
  To melt in full satiety of grief!"

  Thus wail'd the father, grovelling on the ground,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream'd around.

  Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
  (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
  "Ah why has Heaven prolong'd this hated breath,
  Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
  O Hector! late thy parents' pride and joy,
  The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
  To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
  Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
  O fatal change! become in one sad day
  A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

  But not as yet the fatal news had spread
  To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
  As yet no messenger had told his fate,
  Not e'en his stay without the Scaean gate.
  Far in the close recesses of the dome,
  Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
  A growing work employ'd her secret hours,
  Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
  Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
  The bath preparing for her lord's return
  In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
  Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
  Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
  And all her members shake with sudden fear:
  Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls,
  And thus, astonish'd, to her maids she calls:

                        [Illustration: THE BATH.]

                                THE BATH.


  "Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise
  Invades my ear? 'Tis sure my mother's voice.
  My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,
  A pulse unusual flutters at my heart;
  Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate
  (Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
  Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
  But much I fear my Hector's dauntless breast
  Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain,
  Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
  Safe in the crowd he ever scorn'd to wait,
  And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:
  Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath,
  Now quench'd for ever in the arms of death."

  She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace,
  Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,
  Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),
  And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
  Too soon her eyes the killing object found,
  The godlike Hector dragg'd along the ground.
  A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:
  She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
  Her hair's fair ornaments, the braids that bound,
  The net that held them, and the wreath that crown'd,
  The veil and diadem flew far away
  (The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
  Around a train of weeping sisters stands,
  To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
  Scarce from the verge of death recall'd, again
  She faints, or but recovers to complain.

             [Illustration: ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.]

                     ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.


  "O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
  Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
  For sure one star its baneful beam display'd
  On Priam's roof, and Hippoplacia's shade.
  From different parents, different climes we came.
  At different periods, yet our fate the same!
  Why was my birth to great Aetion owed,
  And why was all that tender care bestow'd?
  Would I had never been!--O thou, the ghost
  Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only child, once comfort of my pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
  To help him now! no father to defend!
  For should he 'scape the sword, the common doom,
  What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
  Even from his own paternal roof expell'd,
  Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
  The day, that to the shades the father sends,
  Robs the sad orphan of his father's friends:
  He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
  For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
  Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
  Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
  While those his father's former bounty fed
  Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
  The kindest but his present wants allay,
  To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
  Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
  Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
  Shall cry, 'Begone! thy father feasts not here:'
  The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
  Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
  To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
  Forced by repeated insults to return,
  And to his widow'd mother vainly mourn:
  He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
  With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
  And when still evening gave him up to rest,
  Sunk soft in down upon the nurse's breast,
  Must--ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
  Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,(279)
  Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
  Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.
  But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air,
  Far from thy parents' and thy consort's care;
  Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,
  The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
  Now to devouring flames be these a prey,
  Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
  Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,
  An honour to the living, not the dead!"

  So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear,
  Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear.





BOOK XXIII.


ARGUMENT.

FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.(280)

Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus. After the
funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep, the
ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of burial; the
next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons to fetch wood
for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering their hair to the
dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly twelve Trojan
captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He pays libations to the
Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise the flames. When
the pile has burned all night, they gather the bones, place them in an urn
of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutes the funeral games: the
chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the wrestling, the foot-race, the
single combat, the discus, the shooting with arrows, the darting the
javelin: the various descriptions of which, and the various success of the
several antagonists, make the greatest part of the book.

In this book ends the thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost of
Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in
felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth in burning it; and
the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene is generally on the
sea-shore.

  Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train
  Through the sad city mourn'd her hero slain.
  The body soil'd with dust, and black with gore,
  Lies on broad Hellespont's resounding shore.
  The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
  All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
  These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
  And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

  "Not yet, my brave companions of the war,
  Release your smoking coursers from the car;
  But, with his chariot each in order led,
  Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
  Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
  Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief."

  The troops obey'd; and thrice in order led(281)
  (Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
  And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
  Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
  For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
  Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
  But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
  Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes:
  His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid
  On his dead friend's cold breast, and thus he said:

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour'd ghost
  Hear, and rejoice on Pluto's dreary coast;
  Behold! Achilles' promise is complete;
  The bloody Hector stretch'd before thy feet.
  Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;
  And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,
  Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire;
  Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre."

  Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
  Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,
  Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around
  Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
  All to Achilles' sable ship repair,
  Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
  Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,
  The bristly victims hissing o'er the fire:
  The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
  Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
  Around the hero's prostrate body flow'd,
  In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
  And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
  The glorious victor to the king of kings.
  From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
  With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
  The attending heralds, as by office bound,
  With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
  To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
  They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:(282)

  "No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
  The first and greatest of the gods above!
  Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
  The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
  Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
  And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
  Howe'er, reluctant as I am, I stay
  And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
  (O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
  That Greece the warrior's funeral pile prepare,
  And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
  To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
  Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
  Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire."

  He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
  The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
  Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
  But great Pelides, stretch'd along the shore,
  Where, dash'd on rocks, the broken billows roar,
  Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
  The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
  Along the grass his languid members fall,
  Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
  Hush'd by the murmurs of the rolling deep,
  At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.
  When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes,
  Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem'd to rise:
  In the same robe he living wore, he came:
  In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
  The form familiar hover'd o'er his head,
  "And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:)
  Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
  Living, I seem'd his dearest, tenderest care,
  But now forgot, I wander in the air.
  Let my pale corse the rites of burial know,
  And give me entrance in the realms below:
  Till then the spirit finds no resting-place,
  But here and there the unbodied spectres chase
  The vagrant dead around the dark abode,
  Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
  Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore
  When once we pass, the soul returns no more:
  When once the last funereal flames ascend,
  No more shall meet Achilles and his friend;
  No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;
  Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
  Me fate has sever'd from the sons of earth,
  The fate fore-doom'd that waited from my birth:
  Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall
  Even great and godlike thou art doom'd to fall.
  Hear then; and as in fate and love we join,
  Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!
  Together have we lived; together bred,
  One house received us, and one table fed;
  That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
  May mix our ashes in one common grave."

  "And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight(283)
  Once more return'st thou from the realms of night?
  O more than brother! Think each office paid,
  Whate'er can rest a discontented shade;
  But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
  Afford at least that melancholy joy."

  He said, and with his longing arms essay'd
  In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
  Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,(284)
  And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
  Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
  Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
  Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

  "'Tis true, 'tis certain; man, though dead, retains
  Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
  The form subsists without the body's aid,
  Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
  This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
  Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
  Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

  Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
  And now the rosy-finger'd morn appears,
  Shows every mournful face with tears o'erspread,
  And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
  But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
  With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
  To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
  A charge consign'd to Merion's faithful care.
  With proper instruments they take the road,
  Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
  First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
  O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
  Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound
  But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods,(286)
  (Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods,)
  Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
  On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
  Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
  Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
  The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
  And the slow mules the same rough road return
  The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore
  (Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
  There on the spot which great Achilles show'd,
  They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;
  Circling around the place, where times to come
  Shall view Patroclus' and Achilles' tomb.
  The hero bids his martial troops appear
  High on their cars in all the pomp of war;
  Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires,
  All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
  The chariots first proceed, a shining train;
  Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain;
  Next these the melancholy band appear;
  Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier;
  O'er all the corse their scattered locks they throw;
  Achilles next, oppress'd with mighty woe,
  Supporting with his hands the hero's head,
  Bends o'er the extended body of the dead.
  Patroclus decent on the appointed ground
  They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
  But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
  And from his head divides the yellow hair;
  Those curling locks which from his youth he vow'd,(287)
  And sacred grew, to Sperchius' honour'd flood:
  Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,
  And roll'd his eyes around the watery waste:

  "Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost
  Delightful roll along my native coast!
  To whom we vainly vow'd, at our return,
  These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
  Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
  Where to the day thy silver fountains rise,
  And where in shade of consecrated bowers
  Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
  So vow'd my father, but he vow'd in vain;
  No more Achilles sees his native plain;
  In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
  Patroclus bears them to the shades below."

  Thus o'er Patroclus while the hero pray'd,
  On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
  Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow:
  And now the sun had set upon their woe;
  But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
  "Enough, Atrides! give the troops relief:
  Permit the mourning legions to retire,
  And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
  The pious care be ours, the dead to burn--"
  He said: the people to their ships return:
  While those deputed to inter the slain
  Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.(288)
  A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
  The growing structure spreads on every side;
  High on the top the manly corse they lay,
  And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
  Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
  And the piled victims round the body spread;
  Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
  Suspends around, low-bending o'er the pile.
  Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
  Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
  Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
  Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
  Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
  Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.(289)
  On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
  Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
  Smear'd with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
  And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:(290)

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
  Hear, and exult, on Pluto's dreary coast.
  Behold Achilles' promise fully paid,
  Twelve Trojan heroes offer'd to thy shade;
  But heavier fates on Hector's corse attend,
  Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend."

  So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
  His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
  Celestial Venus hover'd o'er his head,
  And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
  She watch'd him all the night and all the day,
  And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
  Nor sacred Phoebus less employ'd his care;
  He pour'd around a veil of gather'd air,
  And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
  Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.

              [Illustration: THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.]

                      THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.


  Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
  Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise;
  But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,
  Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air,
  And victims promised, and libations cast,
  To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:
  He call'd the aerial powers, along the skies
  To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.
  The winged Iris heard the hero's call,
  And instant hasten'd to their airy hall,
  Where in old Zephyr's open courts on high,
  Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
  She shone amidst them, on her painted bow;
  The rocky pavement glitter'd with the show.
  All from the banquet rise, and each invites
  The various goddess to partake the rites.
  "Not so (the dame replied), I haste to go
  To sacred Ocean, and the floods below:
  Even now our solemn hecatombs attend,
  And heaven is feasting on the world's green end
  With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)
  Far on the extremest limits of the main.
  But Peleus' son entreats, with sacrifice,
  The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
  Let on Patroclus' pile your blast be driven,
  And bear the blazing honours high to heaven."

  Swift as the word she vanish'd from their view;
  Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
  Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
  And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss'd before.
  To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
  The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
  Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
  Till on the pile the gather'd tempest falls.
  The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
  And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
  All night Achilles hails Patroclus' soul,
  With large libations from the golden bowl.
  As a poor father, helpless and undone,
  Mourns o'er the ashes of an only son,
  Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
  And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
  So stay'd Achilles, circling round the shore,
  So watch'd the flames, till now they flame no more.
  'Twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
  The morning planet told the approach of light;
  And, fast behind, Aurora's warmer ray
  O'er the broad ocean pour'd the golden day:
  Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burn'd,
  And to their caves the whistling winds return'd:
  Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
  The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

  Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
  And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
  Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
  Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
  The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
  Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

  "Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
  First let us quench the yet remaining flame
  With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
  The hero's bones with careful view select:
  (Apart, and easy to be known they lie
  Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
  The rest around the margin will be seen
  Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
  These wrapp'd in double cauls of fat, prepare;
  And in the golden vase dispose with care;
  There let them rest with decent honour laid,
  Till I shall follow to the infernal shade.
  Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,
  A common structure on the humble sands:
  Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,
  And late posterity record our praise!"

  The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,
  Wide o'er the pile the sable wine they throw,
  And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
  Next the white bones his sad companions place,
  With tears collected, in the golden vase.
  The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
  The urn a veil of linen covered o'er.
  That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
  And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
  High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
  Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.

  The swarming populace the chief detains,
  And leads amidst a wide extent of plains;
  There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds
  A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds,
  Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),
  Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
  First stood the prizes to reward the force
  Of rapid racers in the dusty course:
  A woman for the first, in beauty's bloom,
  Skill'd in the needle, and the labouring loom;
  And a large vase, where two bright handles rise,
  Of twenty measures its capacious size.
  The second victor claims a mare unbroke,
  Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:
  The third, a charger yet untouch'd by flame;
  Four ample measures held the shining frame:
  Two golden talents for the fourth were placed:
  An ample double bowl contents the last.
  These in fair order ranged upon the plain,
  The hero, rising, thus address'd the train:

  "Behold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
  To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
  Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
  Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
  (A race unrivall'd, which from ocean's god
  Peleus received, and on his son bestow'd.)
  But this no time our vigour to display;
  Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
  Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
  Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
  Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
  And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
  Let others for the noble task prepare,
  Who trust the courser and the flying car."

  Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
  But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
  Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
  And skill'd to manage the high-bounding steed.
  With equal ardour bold Tydides swell'd,
  The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compell'd
  (Which late obey'd the Dardan chiefs command,
  When scarce a god redeem'd him from his hand).
  Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
  And the famed courser of the king of kings:
  Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
  To 'scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
  (Ãthe her name) at home to end his days;
  Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
  Next him Antilochus demands the course
  With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
  Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
  Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
  Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
  The prudent son with unattending ears.

  "My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
  The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless'd;
  Neptune and Jove on thee conferr'd the skill
  Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
  To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
  But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
  Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
  Compare those rivals' judgment and thy own:
  It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
  And to be swift is less than to be wise.
  'Tis more by art than force of numerous strokes
  The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;
  By art the pilot, through the boiling deep
  And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship;
  And 'tis the artist wins the glorious course;
  Not those who trust in chariots and in horse.
  In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,
  And short, or wide, the ungovern'd courser drive:
  While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds,
  The knowing racer to his end proceeds;
  Fix'd on the goal his eye foreruns the course,
  His hand unerring steers the steady horse,
  And now contracts, or now extends the rein,
  Observing still the foremost on the plain.
  Mark then the goal, 'tis easy to be found;
  Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;
  Of some once stately oak the last remains,
  Or hardy fir, unperish'd with the rains:
  Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar;
  And round, a circle for the wheeling car.
  (Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;
  Or then, as now, the limit of a race.)
  Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
  A little bending to the left-hand steed;
  But urge the right, and give him all the reins;
  While thy strict hand his fellow's head restrains,
  And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
  The wheel's round naves appear to brush the goal.
  Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse)
  Clear of the stony heap direct the course;
  Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be
  A joy to others, a reproach to me.
  So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind,
  And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:
  Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed
  Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;
  Or the famed race, through all the regions known,
  That whirl'd the car of proud Laomedon."

  Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage
  Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
  Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
  The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
  They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
  (Roll'd in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
  Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
  And next the brother of the king of men:
  Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
  And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
  They stand in order, an impatient train:
  Pelides points the barrier on the plain,
  And sends before old Phoenix to the place,
  To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
  At once the coursers from the barrier bound;
  The lifted scourges all at once resound;
  Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before;
  And up the champaign thunder from the shore:
  Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,
  And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies;
  Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,
  Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind:
  The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,
  Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground.
  While hot for fame, and conquest all their care,
  (Each o'er his flying courser hung in air,)
  Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein,
  They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
  Now (the last compass fetch'd around the goal)
  At the near prize each gathers all his soul,
  Each burns with double hope, with double pain,
  Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
  First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;
  With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds:
  Close on Eumelus' back they puff the wind,
  And seem just mounting on his car behind;
  Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
  And, hovering o'er, their stretching shadows sees.
  Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
  But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
  Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
  His matchless horses' labour on the plain.
  Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
  Snatch'd from his hope the glories of the day.
  The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
  Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
  And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
  She breaks his rival's chariot from the yoke:
  No more their way the startled horses held;
  The car reversed came rattling on the field;
  Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
  Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
  His batter'd face and elbows strike the ground;
  Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguish'd wound:
  Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
  Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
  Minerva's spirit drives his matchless pace,
  And crowns him victor of the labour'd race.

  The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
  While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
  "Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
  Not that we hope to match Tydides' horse,
  Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
  And gives their lord the honours of the day;
  But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
  Your swiftness? vanquish'd by a female foe?
  Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
  The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
  No more shall Nestor's hand your food supply,
  The old man's fury rises, and ye die.
  Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
  Presents the occasion, could we use it right."

  Thus he. The coursers at their master's threat
  With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
  And now Antilochus with nice survey
  Observes the compass of the hollow way.
  'Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn,
  Fast by the road a precipice was worn:
  Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng
  The Spartan hero's chariot smoked along.
  Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep,
  Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
  Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,
  And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
  "Hold, stay your steeds--What madness thus to ride
  This narrow way! take larger field (he cried),
  Or both must fall."--Atrides cried in vain;
  He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
  Far as an able arm the disk can send,
  When youthful rivals their full force extend,
  So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew
  Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew
  His horse compell'd; foreboding in his fears
  The rattling ruin of the clashing cars,
  The floundering coursers rolling on the plain,
  And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
  But thus upbraids his rival as he flies:
  "Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
  Go, but expect not I'll the prize resign;
  Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine--"
  Then to his steeds with all his force he cries,
  "Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
  Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,
  With fainting knees shall labour in the course,
  And yield the glory yours."--The steeds obey;
  Already at their heels they wing their way,
  And seem already to retrieve the day.

  Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
  The coursers bounding o'er the dusty field.
  The first who mark'd them was the Cretan king;
  High on a rising ground, above the ring,
  The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
  He well observed the chief who led the way,
  And heard from far his animating cries,
  And saw the foremost steed with sharpen'd eyes;
  On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,
  Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
  He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
  "Are yonder horse discern'd by me alone?
  Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
  And other steeds than lately led the way?
  Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
  Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
  For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
  I search to find them, but I search in vain.
  Perchance the reins forsook the driver's hand,
  And, turn'd too short, he tumbled on the strand,
  Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
  With frantic fury from the destined way.
  Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
  For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
  Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
  The great Ãtolian chief, renown'd in war."

  "Old man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
  Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
  Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
  Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
  Eumelus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Still, as at first, unrivall'd lead the race:
  I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
  And hear his shouts victorious o'er the plain."

  Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin'd:
  "Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
  Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
  The last in merit, as the first in pride!
  To vile reproach what answer can we make?
  A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
  And be the king the judge. The most unwise
  Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
  Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
  To fell extremes. But Thetis' godlike son
  Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

  "Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
  Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
  And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end."
  No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
  Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
  High o'er his head the circling lash he wields:
  His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
  His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll'd,
  Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
  Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
  The track his flying wheels had left behind:
  And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
  So swift, it seem'd a flight, and not a race.
  Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
  Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
  From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
  The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
  With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
  The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
  These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
  The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

  Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
  O'erpass'd Atrides) second in the course.
  Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near
  Than to the courser in his swift career
  The following car, just touching with his heel
  And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:
  Such, and so narrow now the space between
  The rivals, late so distant on the green;
  So soon swift Ãthe her lost ground regain'd,
  One length, one moment, had the race obtain'd.

  Merion pursued, at greater distance still,
  With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
  Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;
  Slow dragged the steeds his batter'd chariot on:
  Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:

  "Behold! the man whose matchless art surpass'd
  The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
  Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay
  (Since great Tydides bears the first away)
  To him the second honours of the day."

  The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,
  And then Eumelus had received the prize,
  But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,
  The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
  "Think not (he cries) I tamely will resign,
  O Peleus' son! the mare so justly mine.
  What if the gods, the skilful to confound,
  Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
  Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice,
  And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
  If yet (distinction to thy friend to show,
  And please a soul desirous to bestow)
  Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store
  Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;
  An ample present let him thence receive,
  And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
  But this my prize I never shall forego;
  This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe."

  Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;
  Pleased with the well-turn'd flattery of a friend,
  Achilles smiled: "The gift proposed (he cried),
  Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
  With plates of brass the corslet cover'd o'er,
  (The same renown'd Asteropaeus wore,)
  Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine,
  (No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine."

  He said: Automedon at his command
  The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
  Distinguish'd by his friend, his bosom glows
  With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
  The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
  And still'd the clamour of the shouting bands.
  Not without cause incensed at Nestor's son,
  And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

  "The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
  An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain'd.
  Robb'd of my glory and my just reward,
  To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
  So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
  Or judge me envious of a rival's fame.
  But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
  What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
  What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
  And vindicate by oath th' ill-gotten prize?
  Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
  The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
  And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
  Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
  Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
  The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!"

  The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
  Then mildly thus: "Excuse, if youth have err'd;
  Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
  Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
  Thou know'st the errors of unripen'd age,
  Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
  The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
  The mare, or aught thou ask'st, be freely thine
  Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
  Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn."

  So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
  The mare contested to the king restored.
  Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
  Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
  The fields their vegetable life renew,
  And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
  Such joy the Spartan's shining face o'erspread,
  And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

  "Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree
  'Tis now Atrides' turn to yield to thee.
  Rash heat perhaps a moment might control,
  Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
  Not but (my friend) 'tis still the wiser way
  To waive contention with superior sway;
  For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
  Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
  To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
  Suffice thy father's merit and thy own:
  Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
  Have greatly suffer'd, and have greatly done.
  I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
  Nor is my pride preferr'd before my friend."

  He said; and pleased his passion to command,
  Resign'd the courser to Noemon's hand,
  Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,
  The shining charger to his vessel sent.
  The golden talents Merion next obtain'd;
  The fifth reward, the double bowl, remain'd.
  Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
  And thus the purpose of his gift declares:
  "Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)
  In dear memorial of Patroclus dead;
  Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
  For ever snatch'd from our desiring eyes!
  Take thou this token of a grateful heart,
  Though 'tis not thine to hurl the distant dart,
  The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield,
  Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:
  Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown,
  But left the glory of the past thy own."

  He said, and placed the goblet at his side;
  With joy the venerable king replied:

  "Wisely and well, my son, thy words have proved
  A senior honour'd, and a friend beloved!
  Too true it is, deserted of my strength,
  These wither'd arms and limbs have fail'd at length.
  Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore,
  Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
  Victorious then in every solemn game,
  Ordain'd to Amarynces' mighty name;
  The brave Epeians gave my glory way,
  Ãtolians, Pylians, all resign'd the day.
  I quell'd Clytomedes in fights of hand,
  And backward hurl'd Ancaeus on the sand,
  Surpass'd Iphyclus in the swift career,
  Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
  The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
  But won by numbers, not by art or force:
  For the famed twins, impatient to survey
  Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
  Sprung to their car; and with united pains
  One lash'd the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
  Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
  A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
  I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
  Though once the foremost hero of the field.
  Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
  With martial honours decorate the dead:
  While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
  (Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
  Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
  Not one but honours sacred age and me:
  Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
  May the just gods return another day!"

  Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
  Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

  The prizes next are order'd to the field,
  For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
  A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
  Of six years' age, unconscious of the yoke,
  Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
  Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
  Achilles rising, thus: "Let Greece excite
  Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
  Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
  And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
  On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
  And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
  This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
  The vanquish'd bear the massy bowl away."

  This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;(291)
  High o'er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
  And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
  "Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
  (Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
  This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
  Others, 'tis own'd, in fields of battle shine,
  But the first honours of this fight are mine;
  For who excels in all? Then let my foe
  Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
  Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
  Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
  So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
  To heave the batter'd carcase off the plain."

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
  'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
  To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
  The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
  In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
  (The games ordain'd dead OEdipus to grace,)
  And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
  Him great Tydides urges to contend,
  Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
  Officious with the cincture girds him round;
  And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
  Amid the circle now each champion stands,
  And poises high in air his iron hands;
  With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
  Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
  And painful sweat from all their members flows.
  At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
  Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
  Beneath that ponderous arm's resistless sway
  Down dropp'd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
  As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
  By some huge billow dash'd against the shore,
  Lies panting; not less batter'd with his wound,
  The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
  To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
  Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
  Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
  And dragging his disabled legs along;
  Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o'er;
  His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;(292)
  Wrapp'd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
  His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

  The third bold game Achilles next demands,
  And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
  A massy tripod for the victor lies,
  Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
  And next, the loser's spirits to restore,
  A female captive, valued but at four.
  Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
  When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
  Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
  Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
  Close lock'd above, their heads and arms are mix'd:
  Below, their planted feet at distance fix'd;
  Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
  Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
  Their tops connected, but at wider space
  Fix'd on the centre stands their solid base.
  Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
  The humid sweat from every pore descends;
  Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
  Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
  Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown'd,
  O'erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
  Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
  The watchful caution of his artful foe.
  While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
  Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
  "Or let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
  Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree."

  He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
  With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
  The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
  His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
  Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
  Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
  Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
  He barely stirr'd him, but he could not raise:
  His knee lock'd fast, the foe's attempt denied;
  And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
  Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
  Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
  Again they rage, again to combat rise;
  When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

  "Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
  Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
  Ye both have won: let others who excel,
  Now prove that prowess you have proved so well."

  The hero's words the willing chiefs obey,
  From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
  And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

  And now succeed the gifts ordain'd to grace
  The youths contending in the rapid race:
  A silver urn that full six measures held,
  By none in weight or workmanship excell'd:
  Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
  Elaborate, with artifice divine;
  Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
  And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
  From him descended, good Eunaeus heir'd
  The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
  To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
  Now, the same hero's funeral rites to grace,
  It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
  A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
  And half a talent must content the last.
  Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
  "Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
  Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

  The hero said, and starting from his place,
  Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
  Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass'd
  His youthful equals, Nestor's son, the last.
  Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
  Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
  All start at once; Oileus led the race;
  The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
  Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
  As closely following as the running thread
  The spindle follows, and displays the charms
  Of the fair spinster's breast and moving arms:
  Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
  And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
  His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
  The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
  To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
  And send their souls before him as he flies.
  Now three times turn'd in prospect of the goal,
  The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray'd!
  And present at his thought descends the maid.
  Buoy'd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
  All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
  (O'erturn'd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
  Was clogg'd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
  (The self-same place beside Patroclus' pyre,
  Where late the slaughter'd victims fed the fire.)
  Besmear'd with filth, and blotted o'er with clay,
  Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
  The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
  And left the urn Ulysses' rich reward.
  Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
  The baffled hero thus the Greeks address'd:

  "Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
  A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
  She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
  And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

  Thus sourly wail'd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
  A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
  Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
  Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
  The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
  Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
  He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
  (A green old age unconscious of decays,
  That proves the hero born in better days!)
  Behold his vigour in this active race!
  Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
  For who can match Achilles? He who can,
  Must yet be more than hero, more than man."

  The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
  "Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
  Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll'd;
  Receive a talent of the purest gold."
  The youth departs content. The host admire
  The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

  Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
  Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
  Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
  And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
  "Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
  Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
  Now grace the lists before our army's sight,
  And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
  Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
  And stain his rival's mail with issuing gore,
  The sword Asteropaeus possess'd of old,
  (A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
  Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker's side:
  These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
  For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
  A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends."

  Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus' son,
  And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
  Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
  The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
  Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
  Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
  Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
  But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew'd.
  A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
  Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay'd.
  Not thus the foe: his javelin aim'd above
  The buckler's margin, at the neck he drove.
  But Greece, now trembling for her hero's life,
  Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
  Yet still the victor's due Tydides gains,
  With him the sword and studded belt remains.

  Then hurl'd the hero, thundering on the ground,
  A mass of iron (an enormous round),
  Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
  Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
  And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
  The giant by Achilles slain, he stow'd
  Among his spoils this memorable load.
  For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
  "Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
  Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
  If he be one enrich'd with large domain
  Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
  Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
  His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
  From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city's aid
  For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

  Stern Polypoetes stepp'd before the throng,
  And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
  Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
  Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
  Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
  High o'er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
  Leonteus next a little space surpass'd;
  And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
  O'er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
  From Polypoetes' arm the discus sung:
  Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
  That distant falls among the grazing cows,
  So past them all the rapid circle flies:
  His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
  With force conjoin'd heave off the weighty prize.

  Those, who in skilful archery contend,
  He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
  And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
  Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
  The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
  The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
  To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
  The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

  "Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
  These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
  The single, he whose shaft divides the cord."
  He said: experienced Merion took the word;
  And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
  Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
  Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
  But flies unbless'd! No grateful sacrifice,
  No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
  To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
  For this, thy well-aim'd arrow turn'd aside,
  Err'd from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
  Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
  And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
  Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
  And Merion eager meditates the wound:
  He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
  And following with his eye the soaring dove,
  Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
  With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific
  The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
  Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
  Quite through and through the point its passage found,
  And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
  The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
  With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
  A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
  Then sudden dropp'd, and left her life in air.
  From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
  And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

  To close the funeral games, Achilles last
  A massy spear amid the circle placed,
  And ample charger of unsullied frame,
  With flowers high-wrought, not blacken'd yet by flame.
  For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
  Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
  Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
  Nor here disdain'd the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

  Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector's body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentations of
Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector
lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles' camp, and
partly in Troy.

  Now from the finish'd games the Grecian band
  Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
  All stretch'd at ease the genial banquet share,
  And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
  Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign'd,
  His friend's dear image present to his mind,
  Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
  Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
  Restless he roll'd around his weary bed,
  And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
  The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
  That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
  What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
  What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
  All pass'd before him in remembrance dear,
  Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
  And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
  Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
  Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
  Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
  There as the solitary mourner raves,
  The ruddy morning rises o'er the waves:
  Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join'd!
  The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
  And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
  Was Hector dragg'd, then hurried to the tent.
  There sleep at last o'ercomes the hero's eyes;
  While foul in dust the unhonour'd carcase lies,
  But not deserted by the pitying skies:
  For Phoebus watch'd it with superior care,
  Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
  And, ignominious as it swept the field,
  Spread o'er the sacred corse his golden shield.
  All heaven was moved, and Hermes will'd to go
  By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
  But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
  And th' unrelenting empress of the skies,
  E'er since that day implacable to Troy,
  What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
  Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
  Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
  But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
  To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:

          [Illustration: HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.]

                  HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.


  "Unpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
  Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
  And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
  Still grudge his body to the Trojans' view?
  Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
  The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
  Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
  That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
  A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
  In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
  Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
  Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
  Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
  The greatest evil and the greatest good.
  Still for one loss he rages unresign'd,
  Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
  To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
  Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
  Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
  Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
  But this insatiate, the commission given
  By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
  Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
  Hector's dead earth, insensible of wrong!
  Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
  He violates the laws of man and god."

                  [Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.]

                          THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.


  "If equal honours by the partial skies
  Are doom'd both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
  If Thetis' son must no distinction know,
  Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
  But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
  His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
  Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
  Springs from a goddess by a man's embrace
  (A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
  A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
  To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
  Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
  Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
  Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre."

  Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
  "Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
  Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
  But mine, and every god's peculiar grace
  Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
  Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
  (The only honours men to gods can pay,)
  Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
  The pure libation, and the holy feast:
  Howe'er by stealth to snatch the corse away,
  We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
  But haste, and summon to our courts above
  The azure queen; let her persuasion move
  Her furious son from Priam to receive
  The proffer'd ransom, and the corse to leave."

  He added not: and Iris from the skies,
  Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
  Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
  Refulgent gliding o'er the sable deeps.
  Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
  And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
  Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
  She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
  As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
  From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
  So pass'd the goddess through the closing wave,
  Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret cave:
  There placed amidst her melancholy train
  (The blue-hair'd sisters of the sacred main)
  Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
  And wept her godlike son's approaching doom.
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
  'Tis Jove that calls."--"And why (the dame replies)
  Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
  Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
  Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
  Howe'er, be heaven's almighty sire obey'd--"
  She spake, and veil'd her head in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest add this glory more.
  Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
  Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
  Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
  But yield to ransom and the father's prayer;
  The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
  With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
  Whate'er his honour asks, or heart demands."

  His word the silver-footed queen attends,
  And from Olympus' snowy tops descends.
  Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
  And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
  His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
  Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
  She press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
  And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
  Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
  Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
  O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
  Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
  Lo! Jove himself (for Jove's command I bear)
  Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
  No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
  Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
  Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
  But yield to ransom, and restore the slain."

  To whom Achilles: "Be the ransom given,
  And we submit, since such the will of heaven."

  While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
  Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
  "Haste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
  And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
  Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
  Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
  Safe through the foe by our protection led:
  Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
  Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

     [Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.]

             IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.


  Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
  And swift at Priam's mournful court arrives:
  Where the sad sons beside their father's throne
  Sat bathed in tears, and answer'd groan with groan.
  And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
  (Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp'd attire
  Conceal'd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
  A shower of ashes o'er his neck and head.
  From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
  Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
  Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
  Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
  Before the king Jove's messenger appears,
  And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

  "Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
  From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
  For Hector's sake these walls he bids thee leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
  Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
  Safe through the foe by his protection led:
  Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

  She spoke, and vanish'd. Priam bids prepare
  His gentle mules and harness to the car;
  There, for the gifts, a polish'd casket lay:
  His pious sons the king's command obey.
  Then pass'd the monarch to his bridal-room,
  Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
  And where the treasures of his empire lay;
  Then call'd his queen, and thus began to say:

  "Unhappy consort of a king distress'd!
  Partake the troubles of thy husband's breast:
  I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
  Who bids me try Achilles' mind to move;
  Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
  The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
  Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
  Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe."

  The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
  Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
  "Ah! whither wanders thy distemper'd mind?
  And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
  Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
  Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
  Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
  (O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
  To view that deathful eye, and wander o'er
  Those hands yet red with Hector's noble gore!
  Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare.
  And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
  So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
  Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
  No--pent in this sad palace, let us give
  To grief the wretched days we have to live.
  Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
  Born to his own, and to his parents' woe!
  Doom'd from the hour his luckless life begun,
  To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus' son!
  Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
  My rage, and these barbarities repay!
  For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
  Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
  He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
  And fell a hero in his country's right."

  "Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
  With words of omen, like a bird of night,
  (Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
  Content--By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people's common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
  I see the ruins of your smoking town!
  O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
  A willing ghost to Pluto's dreary dome!"

  He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
  The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
  Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
  Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
  His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
  Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
  And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
  Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

  "Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
  Why did not all in Hector's cause expire?
  Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
  You, the disgrace of Priam's house, remain!
  Mestor the brave, renown'd in ranks of war,
  With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,(293)
  And last great Hector, more than man divine,
  For sure he seem'd not of terrestrial line!
  All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
  And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
  Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
  Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
  Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
  And speed my journey to redeem my son?"

  The sons their father's wretched age revere,
  Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
  High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
  The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
  Box was the yoke, emboss'd with costly pains,
  And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
  Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
  These to the chariot's polish'd pole they bound.
  Then fix'd a ring the running reins to guide,
  And close beneath the gather'd ends were tied.
  Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
  The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
  Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
  (The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
  But the fair horses, long his darling care,
  Himself received, and harness'd to his car:
  Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
  The hoary herald help'd him, at his side.
  While careful these the gentle coursers join'd,
  Sad Hecuba approach'd with anxious mind;
  A golden bowl that foam'd with fragrant wine,
  (Libation destined to the power divine,)
  Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
  And thus consigns it to the monarch's hands:

  "Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
  His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
  Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
  Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
  Pray to that god, who high on Ida's brow
  Surveys thy desolated realms below,
  His winged messenger to send from high,
  And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
  That sign beheld, and strengthen'd from above,
  Boldly pursue the journey mark'd by Jove:
  But if the god his augury denies,
  Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice."

  "'Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
  To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
  The purest water of the living spring:
  (Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
  Then took the golden cup his queen had fill'd;
  On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
  Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

  "O first and greatest! heaven's imperial lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored!
  To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
  And teach him mercy when a father prays.
  If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
  Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
  So shall thy suppliant, strengthen'd from above,
  Fearless pursue the journey mark'd by Jove."

  Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
  Despatch'd his bird, celestial augury!
  The swift-wing'd chaser of the feather'd game,
  And known to gods by Percnos' lofty name.
  Wide as appears some palace-gate display'd.
  So broad, his pinions stretch'd their ample shade,
  As stooping dexter with resounding wings
  The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
  A dawn of joy in every face appears:
  The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
  Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
  The brazen portal in his passage rung;
  The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
  Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
  The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
  And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
  On his slow wheels the following people wait,
  Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
  With hands uplifted eye him as he pass'd,
  And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
  Now forward fares the father on his way,
  Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
  Great Jove beheld him as he cross'd the plain,
  And felt the woes of miserable man.
  Then thus to Hermes: "Thou whose constant cares
  Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
  Behold an object to thy charge consign'd:
  If ever pity touch'd thee for mankind,
  Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
  And safe conduct him to Achilles' tent."

  The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
  O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main;
  Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
  Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
  Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
  Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

  The afflicted monarch shiver'd with despair;
  Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
  Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
  A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
  When Hermes, greeting, touch'd his royal hand,
  And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
  Is seal'd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
  Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
  Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
  What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
  These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
  For what defence, alas! could'st thou provide;
  Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
  Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
  From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
  From Greece I'll guard thee too; for in those lines
  The living image of my father shines."

  "Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
  Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin'd:)
  Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
  My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
  Hail, and be bless'd! For scarce of mortal kind
  Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind."

  "Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
  (The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
  But say, convey'st thou through the lonely plains
  What yet most precious of thy store remains,
  To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
  Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
  Or fliest thou now?--What hopes can Troy retain,
  Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?"

  The king, alarm'd: "Say what, and whence thou art
  Who search the sorrows of a parent's heart,
  And know so well how godlike Hector died?"
  Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

  "You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
  On this sad subject you inquire too much.
  Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view'd
  In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
  I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss'd
  On thousand ships, and wither'd half a host:
  I saw, but help'd not: stern Achilles' ire
  Forbade assistance, and enjoy'd the fire.
  For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
  One ship convey'd us from our native place;
  Polyctor is my sire, an honour'd name,
  Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
  Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
  To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
  To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
  For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
  Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
  And scarce their rulers check their martial rage."

  "If then thou art of stern Pelides' train,
  (The mournful monarch thus rejoin'd again,)
  Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
  My son's dear relics? what befals him dead?
  Have dogs dismember'd (on the naked plains),
  Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

  "O favour'd of the skies! (thus answered then
  The power that mediates between god and men)
  Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
  But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
  This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
  Untouch'd by worms, untainted by the air.
  Still as Aurora's ruddy beam is spread,
  Round his friend's tomb Achilles drags the dead:
  Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
  All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
  Majestical in death! No stains are found
  O'er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
  Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
  Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
  A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

  Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
  And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
  "Blest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant tribute of respect and love!
  Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
  My son forgot not, in exalted power;
  And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
  But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
  A pledge of gratitude for Hector's sake;
  And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
  Safe to Pelides' tent conduct my way."

  To whom the latent god: "O king, forbear
  To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
  But can I, absent from my prince's sight,
  Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
  What from our master's interest thus we draw,
  Is but a licensed theft that 'scapes the law.
  Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
  And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
  Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
  On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
  O'er pathless forests, or the roaring main."

  He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
  And snatch'd the reins, and whirl'd the lash around:
  Before the inspiring god that urged them on,
  The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
  And now they reach'd the naval walls, and found
  The guards repasting, while the bowls go round;
  On these the virtue of his wand he tries,
  And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:
  Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,
  And o'er the trenches led the rolling cars.
  Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,
  And now approach'd Pelides' lofty tent.
  On firs the roof was raised, and cover'd o'er
  With reeds collected from the marshy shore;
  And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,
  (The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat.
  Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength
  A solid pine-tree barr'd of wondrous length:
  Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight,
  But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
  This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide;
  Then swift alighted the celestial guide,
  And thus reveal'd--"Hear, prince! and understand
  Thou ow'st thy guidance to no mortal hand:
  Hermes I am, descended from above,
  The king of arts, the messenger of Jove,
  Farewell: to shun Achilles' sight I fly;
  Uncommon are such favours of the sky,
  Nor stand confess'd to frail mortality.
  Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers;
  Adjure him by his father's silver hairs,
  His son, his mother! urge him to bestow
  Whatever pity that stern heart can know."

  Thus having said, he vanish'd from his eyes,
  And in a moment shot into the skies:
  The king, confirm'd from heaven, alighted there,
  And left his aged herald on the car,
  With solemn pace through various rooms he went,
  And found Achilles in his inner tent:
  There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave,
  And great Automedon, attendance gave:
  These served his person at the royal feast;
  Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.

  Unseen by these, the king his entry made:
  And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,
  Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears;
  Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears;
  Those direful hands his kisses press'd, embrued
  Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!

  As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,
  Pursued for murder, flies his native clime)
  Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed,
  All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:
  Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise:
  All mute, yet seem'd to question with their eyes:
  Each look'd on other, none the silence broke,
  Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke:

  "Ah think, thou favour'd of the powers divine!(295)
  Think of thy father's age, and pity mine!
  In me that father's reverend image trace,
  Those silver hairs, that venerable face;
  His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
  In all my equal, but in misery!
  Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
  Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
  Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
  And beg protection with a feeble cry.
  Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
  He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
  And, hearing, still may hope a better day
  May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
  No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
  The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
  Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
  The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
  Nineteen one mother bore--Dead, all are dead!
  How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
  Still one was left their loss to recompense;
  His father's hope, his country's last defence.
  Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
  Unhappy in his country's cause he fell!

  "For him through hostile camps I bent my way,
  For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
  Large gifts proportion'd to thy wrath I bear;
  O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

  "Think of thy father, and this face behold!
  See him in me, as helpless and as old!
  Though not so wretched: there he yields to me,
  The first of men in sovereign misery!
  Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace
  The scourge and ruin of my realm and race;
  Suppliant my children's murderer to implore,
  And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!"

  These words soft pity in the chief inspire,
  Touch'd with the dear remembrance of his sire.
  Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)
  The old man's cheek he gently turn'd away.
  Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;
  And now the mingled tides together flow:
  This low on earth, that gently bending o'er;
  A father one, and one a son deplore:
  But great Achilles different passions rend,
  And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
  The infectious softness through the heroes ran;
  One universal solemn shower began;
  They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.

  Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
  From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
  The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
  On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
  Not unrelenting; then serene began
  With words to soothe the miserable man:

  "Alas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,
  Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone
  Two pass through foes, and thus undaunted face
  The man whose fury has destroy'd thy race!
  Heaven sure has arm'd thee with a heart of steel,
  A strength proportion'd to the woes you feel.
  Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:
  To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
  Such is, alas! the gods' severe decree:
  They, only they are blest, and only free.
  Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
  The source of evil one, and one of good;
  From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
  Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
  To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
  To taste the bad unmix'd, is cursed indeed;
  Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
  He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
  The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
  But find the cordial draught is dash'd with care.
  Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
  What stars concurring bless'd his natal hour!
  A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
  Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
  One evil yet o'ertakes his latest day:
  No race succeeding to imperial sway;
  An only son; and he, alas! ordain'd
  To fall untimely in a foreign land.
  See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
  Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
  Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
  In riches once, in children once excell'd;
  Extended Phrygia own'd thy ample reign,
  And all fair Lesbos' blissful seats contain,
  And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured main.
  But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
  And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
  What sees the sun, but hapless heroes' falls?
  War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
  What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
  These unavailing sorrows o'er the dead;
  Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
  But thou, alas! may'st live to suffer more!"

  To whom the king: "O favour'd of the skies!
  Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
  On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
  O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
  His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
  Thou, as thou may'st, these boundless stores enjoy;
  Safe may'st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
  So shall thy pity and forbearance give
  A weak old man to see the light and live!"

  "Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
  While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
  Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
  To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
  For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
  (Old Ocean's daughter, silver-footed dame,)
  Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
  Some god impels with courage not thy own:
  No human hand the weighty gates unbarr'd,
  Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
  To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
  Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove's command,
  I show thee, king! thou tread'st on hostile land;
  Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o'er,
  And shake the purpose of my soul no more."

  The sire obey'd him, trembling and o'eraw'd.
  Achilles, like a lion, rush'd abroad:
  Automedon and Alcimus attend,
  (Whom most he honour'd, since he lost his friend,)
  These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
  And led the hoary herald to the tent;
  Next, heap'd on high, the numerous presents bear,
  (Great Hector's ransom,) from the polish'd car.
  Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,
  They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
  Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil
  To wash the body and anoint with oil,
  Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire,
  Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
  The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
  Nor Jove's command, should check the rising rage.
  This done, the garments o'er the corse they spread;
  Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:
  Then, while the body on the car they laid,
  He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus' shade:

  "If, in that gloom which never light must know,
  The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below,
  O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil
  (Restoring Hector) heaven's unquestion'd will.
  The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,
  To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine."(296)

  He said, and, entering, took his seat of state;
  Where full before him reverend Priam sate;
  To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun:
  "Lo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;
  Extended on the funeral couch he lies;
  And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,
  The sight is granted to thy longing eyes:
  But now the peaceful hours of sacred night
  Demand reflection, and to rest invite:
  Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,
  The common cares that nourish life forego.
  Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,
  A parent once, whose sorrows equall'd thine:
  Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids,
  In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;
  Those by Apollo's silver bow were slain,
  These, Cynthia's arrows stretch'd upon the plain:
  So was her pride chastised by wrath divine,
  Who match'd her own with bright Latona's line;
  But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoy'd;
  Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroy'd.
  Steep'd in their blood, and in the dust outspread,
  Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead;
  None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
  (For Jove had turn'd the nation all to stone.)
  The gods themselves, at length relenting gave
  The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
  Herself a rock (for such was heaven's high will)
  Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;
  Where round the bed whence Achelous springs,
  The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;
  There high on Sipylus's shaggy brow,
  She stands, her own sad monument of woe;
  The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.

  "Such griefs, O king! have other parents known;
  Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
  The care of heaven thy Hector has appear'd,
  Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr'd;
  Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown'd,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream around."

  He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe
  With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
  The limbs they sever from the reeking hide,
  With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:
  Each on the coals the separate morsels lays,
  And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Automedon bestow'd.
  The chief himself to each his portion placed,
  And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
  When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
  The wondering hero eyes his royal guest:
  No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
  His godlike aspect and majestic size;
  Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;
  And there, the mild benevolence of age.
  Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
  (A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:

  "Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
  My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
  For, since the day that number'd with the dead
  My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
  Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
  My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
  Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
  I share thy banquet, and consent to live."

  With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
  With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
  Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
  And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
  Then he: "Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
  Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
  Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
  To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
  Approaching sudden to our open'd tent,
  Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
  Should such report thy honour'd person here,
  The king of men the ransom might defer;
  But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
  Remains unask'd; what time the rites require
  To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
  Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey."

  "If then thy will permit (the monarch said)
  To finish all due honours to the dead,
  This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
  The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
  And at what distance from our walls aspire
  The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
  Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
  The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
  The next, to raise his monument be given;
  The twelfth we war, if war be doom'd by heaven!"

  "This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
  Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy."

  Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
  The old man's fears, and turn'd within the tent;
  Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms,
  Expects her hero with desiring arms.
  But in the porch the king and herald rest;
  Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
  Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
  Industrious Hermes only was awake,
  The king's return revolving in his mind,
  To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
  The power descending hover'd o'er his head:
  "And sleep'st thou, father! (thus the vision said:)
  Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
  Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord?
  Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,
  Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee;
  May offer all thy treasures yet contain,
  To spare thy age; and offer all in vain."

  Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,
  And raised his friend: the god before him goes:
  He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,
  And moves in silence through the hostile land.
  When now to Xanthus' yellow stream they drove,
  (Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)
  The winged deity forsook their view,
  And in a moment to Olympus flew.
  Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray,
  Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:
  Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go
  The sage and king, majestically slow.
  Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion's spire,
  The sad procession of her hoary sire;
  Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
  (Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
  A shower of tears o'erflows her beauteous eyes,
  Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

  "Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
  Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
  If e'er ye rush'd in crowds, with vast delight,
  To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
  Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
  Your common triumph, and your common woe."

  In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
  Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
  In every face the self-same grief is shown;
  And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
  At Scaea's gates they meet the mourning wain,
  Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
  The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
  Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter'd hair:
  Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
  And there had sigh'd and sorrow'd out the day;
  But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
  "Forbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
  First to the palace let the car proceed,
  Then pour your boundless sorrows o'er the dead."

  The waves of people at his word divide,
  Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
  Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
  They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
  A melancholy choir attend around,
  With plaintive sighs, and music's solemn sound:
  Alternately they sing, alternate flow
  The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
  While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
  And nature speaks at every pause of art.

  First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
  Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
  "And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
  Snatch'd in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only son, once comfort of our pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  Never to manly age that son shall rise,
  Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
  For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
  Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
  Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
  Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
  Now hostile fleets must waft those infants o'er
  (Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
  Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
  The sad companion of thy mother's woe;
  Driven hence a slave before the victor's sword
  Condemn'd to toil for some inhuman lord:
  Or else some Greek whose father press'd the plain,
  Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
  In Hector's blood his vengeance shall enjoy,
  And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.(297)
  For thy stern father never spared a foe:
  Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe!
  Thence many evils his sad parents bore,
  His parents many, but his consort more.
  Why gav'st thou not to me thy dying hand?
  And why received not I thy last command?
  Some word thou would'st have spoke, which, sadly dear,
  My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
  Which never, never could be lost in air,
  Fix'd in my heart, and oft repeated there!"

  Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
  Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

  The mournful mother next sustains her part:
  "O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
  Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
  And by the immortals even in death beloved!
  While all my other sons in barbarous bands
  Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
  This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
  Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
  Sentenced, 'tis true, by his inhuman doom,
  Thy noble corse was dragg'd around the tomb;
  (The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
  Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
  Yet glow'st thou fresh with every living grace;
  No mark of pain, or violence of face:
  Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver bow
  Dismiss'd thee gently to the shades below."

  Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
  Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
  Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
  Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

  "Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join'd(298)
  Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind,
  Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o'er
  Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
  (O had I perish'd, ere that form divine
  Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
  Yet was it ne'er my fate, from thee to find
  A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
  When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
  Thy pity check'd my sorrows in their flow.
  If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
  Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
  Thy gentle accents soften'd all my pain.
  For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
  The wretched source of all this misery.
  The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
  Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
  Through Troy's wide streets abandon'd shall I roam!
  In Troy deserted, as abhorr'd at home!"

  So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
  Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
  On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
  But Priam check'd the torrent as it rose:
  "Perform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
  And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
  Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
  Achilles grants these honours to the dead."(299)

                    [Illustration: FUNERAL OF HECTOR.]

                            FUNERAL OF HECTOR.


  He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train
  Their mules and oxen harness to the wain,
  Pour through the gates, and fell'd from Ida's crown,
  Roll back the gather'd forests to the town.
  These toils continue nine succeeding days,
  And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
  But when the tenth fair morn began to shine,
  Forth to the pile was borne the man divine,
  And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes,
  Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise.
  Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
  With rosy lustre streak'd the dewy lawn,
  Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre,
  And quench with wine the yet remaining fire.
  The snowy bones his friends and brothers place
  (With tears collected) in a golden vase;
  The golden vase in purple palls they roll'd,
  Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.
  Last o'er the urn the sacred earth they spread,
  And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead.
  (Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done,
  Watch'd from the rising to the setting sun.)
  All Troy then moves to Priam's court again,
  A solemn, silent, melancholy train:
  Assembled there, from pious toil they rest,
  And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast.
  Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,
  And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade.(300)





CONCLUDING NOTE.


We have now passed through the Iliad, and seen the anger of Achilles, and
the terrible effects of it, at an end, as that only was the subject of the
poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author to proceed
to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the common reader
to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the chief actors in
this poem after the conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector by
the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are described
by Virgil in the second book of the Ãneid.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an arrow
in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself through
indignation.

Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at the
taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her
first husband, who received her again into favour.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Ãgysthus, at the
instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had dishonoured
his bed with Ãgysthus.

Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and scarce
escaped with his life from his adulterous wife Ãgiale; but at last was
received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is uncertain how
he died.

Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country.

Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last returned
in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homer's Odyssey.

For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking leave
at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others, with any
defences or apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring to raise a
vain monument to myself, of the merits or difficulties of it (which must
be left to the world, to truth, and to posterity), let me leave behind me
a memorial of my friendship with one of the most valuable of men, as well
as finest writers, of my age and country, one who has tried, and knows by
his own experience, how hard an undertaking it is to do justice to Homer,
and one whom (I am sure) sincerely rejoices with me at the period of my
labours. To him, therefore, having brought this long work to a conclusion,
I desire to dedicate it, and to have the honour and satisfaction of
placing together, in this manner, the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of

March 25, 1720

                                                                   A. POPE

Ton theon de eupoiia--to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetikn kai allois
epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos
proionta.

                           M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso,_ lib. i. Section 17.





END OF THE ILLIAD






FOOTNOTES


    1 "What," says Archdeacon Wilberforce, "is the natural root of loyalty
      as distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal security
      as is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that
      consciousness of a natural bond among the families of men which
      gives a fellow-feeling to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists
      their affections in behalf of those time-honoured representatives of
      their ancient blood, in whose success they feel a personal interest?
      Hence the delight when we recognize an act of nobility or justice in
      our hereditary princes

        "'Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo,
        Projice tela manu _sanguis meus_'

      "So strong is this feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence
      even when history witnesses that vast convulsions have rent and
      weakened it and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts has been
      rekindled in our own days towards the grand daughter of George the
      Third of Hanover.

      "Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those
      great lawgivers of man's race, who have given expression, in the
      immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature.
      The thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance
      of the human race. In this mutual ground every man meets his
      brother, they have been bet forth by the providence of God to
      vindicate for all of us what nature could effect, and that, in these
      representatives of our race, we might recognize our common
      benefactors.'--_Doctrine of the Incarnation,_ pp. 9, 10.

    2 Eikos de min aen kai mnaemoruna panton grapherthai. Vit. Hom. in
      Schweigh Herodot t. iv. p. 299, sq. Section 6. I may observe that
      this Life has been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend
      Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the
      Odyssey. The present abridgement however, will contain all that is
      of use to the reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is
      most insignificant.

    3 --_I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair observes,
      "The first poets sang their own verses." Sextus Empir. adv. Mus. p.
      360 ed. Fabric. Ou hamelei ge toi kai oi poiaetai melopoioi
      legontai, kai ta Omaerou epae to palai pros lyran aedeto.

      "The voice," observes Heeren, "was always accompanied by some
      instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a
      prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he
      accompanied the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a
      medium between singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody
      were regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to
      remain intelligible to all. In countries where nothing similar is
      found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but
      whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of
      Italy, can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius."--_Ancient
      Greece,_ p. 94.

    4 "Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing
      that "poplars can hardly live so long".  But setting aside the fact
      that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients
      had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near
      places consecrated by the presence of gods and great men. See Cicero
      de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under
      which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona
      gave birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of
      Byzantium, _s. v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any
      of the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd
      rightly observes, "The authenticity of these fragments depends upon
      that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are
      taken." Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop. Cf. Coleridge,
      Classic Poets, p. 317.

    5 It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert. Vit.
      Cleob. p. 62, ed. Casaub.

    6 I trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the
      Greek leschai.

    7 Os ei tous, Homerous doxei trephein autois, omilon pollon te kai
      achreoin exousin. enteuthen de kai tounoma Homeros epekrataese to
      Melaesigenei apo taes symphoraes oi gar Kumaioi tous tuphlous
      Homerous legousin. Vit. Hom. _l. c._ p. 311. The etymology has been
      condemned by recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127,
      and Mackenzie's note, p. xiv.

    8 Thestorides, thnetoisin anoiston poleon per, ouden aphrastoteron
      peletai noou anthropoisin. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at Phocoea,
      Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocoeid.
      See Muller's Hist. of Lit., vi. Section 3. Welcker, _l. c._ pp. 132,
      272, 358, sqq., and Mure, Gr. Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq.

    9 This is so pretty a picture of early manners and hospitality, that
      it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from the
      Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was the author of
      this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer
      with certain events described in his poems, and in eliciting from
      them the germs of something like a personal narrative.

   10 Dia logon estionto. A common metaphor. So Plato calls the parties
      conversing daitumones, or estiatores. Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist.
      Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. Petav So diaegaemasi sophois
      omou kai terpnois aedio taen Thoinaen tois hestiomenois epoiei,
      Choricius in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. T. viii. P. 851. logois gar estia,
      Athenaeus vii p 275, A

   11 It was at Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that
      Homer is said to have written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of
      the Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia, and some other minor works.

   12 Chandler, Travels,  vol. i. p. 61, referred to in the Voyage
      Pittoresque dans la Grece, vol. i. P. 92, where a view of the spot
      is given of which the author candidly says,-- "Je ne puis repondre
      d'une exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue generale que j'en donne,
      car etant alle seul pour l'examiner je perdis mon crayon, et je fus
      oblige de m'en fier a ma memoire. Je ne crois cependant pas avoir
      trop a me plaindre d'elle en cette occasion."

   13 A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the character
      of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the assumption
      of Mentor's form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses, Minerva.
      The classical reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880;
      _Xyland._ Heraclid. Pont. Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Gale's Opusc.
      Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s.
      f.

   14 Vit. Hom. Section 28.

   15 The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenzie's note, p. xxx.

   16 Heeren's Ancient Greece, p. 96.

   17 Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer's Caxtons v. i. p. 4.

   18 Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387.

   19 Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

   20 Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which
      I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

          "Origias, farewell! and oh! remember me
          Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
          A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
          And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
          Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
          Oh! answer all,--'A blind old man and poor
        Sweetest he sings--and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'"

                                                   _See_ Thucyd. iii, 104.

   21 Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26. Othen en tae Odysseia
      pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio, oo dixa taes
      sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos

   22 See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie
      has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers
      on the subject, which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and
      Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. His own views are moderate,
      and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses
      hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend
      those hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in
      advocating any individual theory.

   23 Letters to Phileleuth; Lips.

   24 Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq.

   25 It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the memory
      may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to that
      of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
      warning, to 'rhapsodize,' night after night, parts which when laid
      together, would amount to an immense number of lines. But all this
      is nothing to two instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a
      gentleman of the highest intellectual attainments, and who held a
      distinguished rank among the men of letters in the last century, he
      informed us that the day before he had passed much time in examining
      a man, not highly educated, who had learned to repeat the whole
      Gierusalemme of Tasso, not only to recite it consecutively, but also
      to repeat those stanzas in utter defiance of the sense, either
      forwards or backwards, or from the eighth line to the first,
      alternately the odd and even lines--in short, whatever the passage
      required; the memory, which seemed to cling to the words much more
      than to the sense, had it at such perfect command, that it could
      produce it under any form. Our informant went on to state that this
      singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the
      same manner. But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to
      which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty
      years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No such person
      can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could
      actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse
      required from any part of the Bible--even the obscurest and most
      unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not
      mention these facts as touching the more difficult part of the
      question before us, but facts they are; and if we find so much
      difficulty in calculating the extent to which the mere memory may be
      cultivated, are we, in these days of multifarious reading, and of
      countless distracting affairs, fair judges of the perfection to
      which the invention and the memory combined may attain in a simpler
      age, and among a more single minded people?--Quarterly Review, _l.
      c.,_ p. 143, sqq.

      Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, "The
      Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer
      in length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it
      exists only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with
      writing. But the songs of a nation are probably the last things
      which are committed to writing, for the very reason that they are
      remembered."-- _Ancient Greece._ p. 100.

   26 Vol. II p. 198, sqq.

   27 Quarterly Review, _l. c.,_ p. 131 sq.

   28 Betrachtungen uber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p. 204. Notes
      and Queries, vol. v. p. 221.

   29 Prolegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c.

   30 Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq.

   31 "Who," says Cicero, de Orat. iii. 34, "was more learned in that age,
      or whose eloquence is reported to have been more perfected by
      literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first to have
      disposed the books of Homer in the order in which we now have them?"
      Compare Wolf's Prolegomena, Section 33

   32 "The first book, together with the eighth, and the books from the
      eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seems to form the primary
      organization of the poem, then properly an Achilleis."--Grote, vol.
      ii. p. 235

   33 K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq.

   34 See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroeder's edition, 4to.,
      Delphis, 1728.

   35 Ancient Greece, p. 101.

   36 The best description of this monument will be found in Vaux's
      "Antiquities of the British Museum," p. 198 sq. The monument itself
      (Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known.

   37 Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276.

   38 Preface to her Homer.

   39 Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c.

   40 The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few particulars,
      is translated from Bitaube, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary
      that has ever been drawn up:--"A hero, injured by his general, and
      animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a
      season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this
      interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been
      occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of
      which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length
      opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the
      principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission
      to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent
      presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his
      character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated,
      and is on the verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a
      friend; this friend weeps before him, and asks for the hero's arms,
      and for permission to go to the war in his stead. The eloquence of
      friendship prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or
      the gifts of the general. He lends his armour to his friend, but
      commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy's army,
      because he reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and
      because he also fears for his friend's life. The prohibition is
      forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but his courage; his corpse
      is brought back to the hero, and the hero's arms become the prize of
      the conqueror. Then the hero, given up to the most lively despair,
      prepares to fight; he receives from a divinity new armour, is
      reconciled with his general and, thirsting for glory and revenge,
      enacts prodigies of valour, recovers the victory, slays the enemy's
      chief, honours his friend with superb funeral rites, and exercises a
      cruel vengeance on the body of his destroyer; but finally appeased
      by the tears and prayers of the father of the slain warrior,
      restores to the old man the corpse of his son, which he buries with
      due solemnities.'--Coleridge, p. 177, sqq.

   41 Vultures: Pope is more accurate than the poet he translates, for
      Homer writes "a prey to dogs and to _all_ kinds of birds. But all
      kinds of birds are not carnivorous.

   42 --_i.e._ during the whole time of their striving the will of Jove was
      being gradually accomplished.

   43 Compare Milton's "Paradise Lost" i. 6

        "Sing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
        Of Horeb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
        That shepherd."

   44 --_Latona's son: i.e._ Apollo.

   45 --_King of men:_ Agamemnon.

   46 --_Brother kings:_ Menelaus and Agamemnon.

   47 --_Smintheus_ an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian name for a
      _mouse,_ was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a plague of
      mice which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however, says, that
      when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by an
      oracle to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by
      the original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for
      the night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern
      straps of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment
      of the oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to
      Sminthean Apollo. Grote, "History of Greece," i. p. 68, remarks that
      the "worship of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and
      its neighboring territory, dates before the earliest period of
      Aeolian colonization."

   48 --_Cilla,_ a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a
      sister of Hippodamia, slain by OEnomaus.

   49 A mistake. It should be,


          "If e'er I _roofed_ thy graceful fane,"


      for the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later
      date.

   50 --_Bent was his bow_ "The Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in mind,
      is a different character from the deity of the same name in the
      later classical pantheon. Throughout both poems, all deaths from
      unforeseen or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate
      of the young child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of
      infancy or flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into
      the grave, or of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career
      of crime, are ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The
      oracular functions of the god rose naturally out of the above
      fundamental attributes, for who could more appropriately impart to
      mortals what little foreknowledge Fate permitted of her decrees than
      the agent of her most awful dispensations? The close union of the
      arts of prophecy and song explains his additional office of god of
      music, while the arrows with which he and his sister were armed,
      symbols of sudden death in every age, no less naturally procured him
      that of god of archery. Of any connection between Apollo and the
      Sun, whatever may have existed in the more esoteric doctrine of the
      Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in either Iliad or
      Odyssey."--Mure, "History of Greek Literature," vol. i. p. 478, sq.

   51 It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with
      animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind.

   52 --_Convened to council._ The public assembly in the heroic times is
      well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. "It is an assembly for
      talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the chiefs
      in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizers--often for
      eloquence, and sometimes for quarrel--but here its ostensible
      purposes end."

   53 Old Jacob Duport, whose "Gnomologia Homerica" is full of curious and
      useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which
      reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the
      belief that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men
      were interested.

   54 Rather, "bright-eyed." See the German critics quoted by Arnold.

   55 The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received
      Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus.

   56 The Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took
      their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is
      fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an
      _ant,_ "because they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like
      them were indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the
      earth; the change from ants to men is founded merely on the
      equivocation of their name, which resembles that of the ant: they
      bore a further resemblance to these little animals, in that instead
      of inhabiting towns or villages, at first they commonly resided in
      the open fields, having no other retreats but dens and the cavities
      of trees, until Ithacus brought them together, and settled them in
      more secure and comfortable habitations."--Anthon's "Lempriere."

   57 Eustathius, after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes this
      apparition, as if the appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen by
      the rest, was intended to point out the sudden recollection that he
      would gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and that it were best to
      restrain his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his services.
      The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, "De Deo
      Socratis."

   58 Compare Milton, "Paradise Lost," bk. ii:

          "Though his tongue
        Dropp'd manna."

      So Proverbs v. 3, "For the lips of a strange woman drop as an
      honey-comb."

   59 Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being supposed
      to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could not be
      obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the
      lustration. Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai,
      embalon alas, phakois.

   60 The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at
      liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation.
      Pollux, Onom. viii. p. 159. The office was generally given to old
      men, and they were believed to be under the especial protection of
      Jove and Mercury.

   61 His mother, Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was
      courted by Neptune and Jupiter. When, however, it was known that the
      son to whom she would give birth must prove greater than his father,
      it was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus, with great
      difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by
      assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire
      through her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles
      would have shared the same fate had not his father rescued him. She
      afterwards rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters
      of the Styx, with the exception of that part of the heel by which
      she held him. Hygin. Fab. 54

   62 Thebe was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium.

   63 That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes.

   64 Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service
      rendered to Jove by Thetis:

        "Nay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove
        She loosed"--Dyce's "Calaber," s. 58.

   65 --_To Fates averse._ Of the gloomy destiny reigning throughout the
      Homeric poems, and from which even the gods are not exempt, Schlegel
      well observes, "This power extends also to the world of gods-- for
      the Grecian gods are mere powers of nature--and although immeasurably
      higher than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on
      an equal footing with himself."--'Lectures on the Drama' v. p. 67.

   66 It has been observed that the annual procession of the sacred ship
      so often represented on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the
      deity from Ethiopia after some days' absence, serves to show the
      Ethiopian origin of Thebes, and of the worship of Jupiter Ammon. "I
      think," says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the
      holy ship, "that this procession is represented in one of the great
      sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon
      is on the shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by
      another boat. It is therefore on its voyage. This must have been one
      of the most celebrated festivals, since, even according to the
      interpretation of antiquity, Homer alludes to it when he speaks of
      Jupiter's visit to the Ethiopians, and his twelve days'
      absence."--Long, "Egyptian Antiquities" vol. 1 p. 96. Eustathius,
      vol. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. Basil) gives this interpretation, and
      likewise an allegorical one, which we will spare the reader.

   67 --_Atoned,_ i.e. reconciled. This is the proper and most natural
      meaning of the word, as may be seen from Taylor's remarks in
      Calmet's Dictionary, p.110, of my edition.

   68 That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats. "If
      the sacrifice was in honour of the celestial gods, the throat was
      bent upwards towards heaven; but if made to the heroes, or infernal
      deities, it was killed with its throat toward the ground."-- "Elgin
      Marbles," vol i. p.81.

        "The jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
        The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste,
        Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;
        The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
        Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
        Stretch'd on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
        Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with
                    wine."

                                                Dryden's "Virgil," i. 293.

   69 --_Crown'd, i.e._ filled to the brim. The custom of adorning goblets
      with flowers was of later date.

   70 --_He spoke,_ &c. "When a friend inquired of Phidias what pattern he
      had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he is said to have answered by
      repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the poet represents
      the majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby signifying
      that the genius of Homer had inspired him with it. Those who beheld
      this statue are said to have been so struck with it as to have asked
      whether Jupiter had descended from heaven to show himself to
      Phidias, or whether Phidias had been carried thither to contemplate
      the god."-- "Elgin Marbles," vol. xii p.124.

           71 "So was his will
          Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath,
          That shook heav'n's whole circumference, confirm'd."

                                                  "Paradise Lost" ii. 351.

   72 --_A double bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something
      like the measures by which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is
      sold. See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq.

   73 "Paradise Lost," i. 44.

          "Him th' Almighty power
        Hurl'd headlong flaming from th ethereal sky,
        With hideous ruin and combustion"

   74 The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Jove's displeasure was
      this--After Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a
      storm, which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast
      Jove into a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in revenge,
      fastened iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and
      Vulcan, attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in
      the manner described. The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep
      explanations for this amusing fiction. See Heraclides, 'Ponticus,"
      p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The story is told by Homer himself in Book xv.
      The Sinthians were a race of robbers, the ancient inhabitants of
      Lemnos which island was ever after sacred to Vulcan.

        "Nor was his name unheard or unadored
        In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
        Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
        From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
        Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn
        To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
        A summer's day and with the setting sun
        Dropp'd from the zenith like a falling star
        On Lemnos, th' Aegean isle thus they relate."

                                                   "Paradise Lost," i. 738

   75 It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that "The gods
      formed a sort of political community of their own which had its
      hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for
      power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora
      of Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets or festivals."

   76 Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this deception of
      Jupiter's, and at his other attacks on the character of the gods,
      that he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment. (See
      Minucius Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well
      observes, that the supreme father of gods and men had a full right
      to employ a lying spirit to work out his ultimate will. Compare
      "Paradise Lost," v. 646:

          "And roseate dews disposed
        All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest."

   77 --_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think,
      evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and others.

        "When, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream
        Rush'd from the skies, the bane of her and Troy."

                  Dyce's "Select Translations from Quintus Calaber," p.10.

           78 "Sleep'st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close
        Thy eye-lids?"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 673.

   79 This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving voice
      of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See Pliny's Panegyric
      on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,


          "Turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem."


   80 --_The same in habit, &c._

        "To whom once more the winged god appears;
        His former youthful mien and shape he wears."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 803.

           81 "As bees in spring-time, when
        The sun with Taurus rides,
        Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
        In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
        Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
        The suburb of this straw-built citadel,
        New-nibb'd with balm, expatiate and confer
        Their state affairs. So thick the very crowd
        Swarm'd and were straiten'd."--"Paradise Lost" i. 768.

   82 It was the herald's duty to make the people sit down. "A _standing_
      agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an evening
      agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the forerunner of
      mischief ('Odyssey,' iii. 138)."--Grote, ii. p. 91, _note._

   83 This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of
      the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See
      Thucydides i. 9. "It is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being
      the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in
      furthering the process of acquisition."--Grote, i. p. 212. Compare
      Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Selections, p. 43).

          "Thus the monarch spoke,
        Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup,
        Golden, and framed by art divine (a gift
        Which to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan brought
        Upon his nuptial day, when he espoused
        The Queen of Love), the sire of gods bestow'd
        The cup on Dardanus, who gave it next
        To Ericthonius Tros received it then,
        And left it, with his wealth, to be possess'd
        By Ilus he to great Laomedon
        Gave it, and last to Priam's lot it fell."

   84 Grote, i, p. 393, states the number of the Grecian forces at upwards
      of 100,000 men. Nichols makes a total of 135,000.

           85 "As thick as when a field
        Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
        His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
        Sways them."--Paradise Lost," iv. 980, sqq.

   86 This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest
      tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of
      power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it,
      and, in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in
      the Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren,
      "Ancient Greece," ch. vi. p. 105.

   87 It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and
      contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition
      of Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent.
      Of the gradual and individual development of Homer's heroes,
      Schlegel well observes, "In bas-relief the figures are usually in
      profile, and in the epos all are characterized in the simplest
      manner in relief; they are not grouped together, but follow one
      another; so Homer's heroes advance, one by one, in succession before
      us. It has been remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively
      closed, but that we are left to suppose something both to precede
      and to follow it. The bas-relief is equally without limit, and may
      be continued _ad infinitum,_ either from before or behind, on which
      account the ancients preferred for it such subjects as admitted of
      an indefinite extension, sacrificial processions, dances, and lines
      of combatants, and hence they also exhibit bas-reliefs on curved
      surfaces, such as vases, or the frieze of a rotunda, where, by the
      curvature, the two ends are withdrawn from our sight, and where,
      while we advance, one object appears as another disappears. Reading
      Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present object alone
      arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, and do not
      concern ourselves about what is to follow."--"Dramatic Literature,"
      p. 75.

   88 "There cannot be a clearer indication than this description --so
      graphic in the original poem--of the true character of the Homeric
      agora. The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent,
      not often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief. The fate
      which awaits a presumptuous critic, even where his virulent
      reproaches are substantially well-founded, is plainly set forth in
      the treatment of Thersites; while the unpopularity of such a
      character is attested even more by the excessive pains which Homer
      takes to heap upon him repulsive personal deformities, than by the
      chastisement of Odysseus he is lame, bald, crook-backed, of
      misshapen head, and squinting vision."--Grote, vol. i. p. 97.

   89 According to Pausanias, both the sprig and the remains of the tree
      were exhibited in his time. The tragedians, Lucretius and others,
      adopted a different fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and
      seem to have found the sacrifice of Iphigena better suited to form
      the subject of a tragedy. Compare Dryden's "Ãneid," vol. iii. sqq.

   90 --_Full of his god, i.e.,_ Apollo, filled with the prophetic spirit.
      "_The_ god" would be more simple and emphatic.

   91 Those critics who have maintained that the "Catalogue of Ships" is
      an interpolation, should have paid more attention to these lines,
      which form a most natural introduction to their enumeration.

   92 The following observation will be useful to Homeric readers:
      "Particular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to particular
      deities. To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of
      advanced age might be offered. An ox of five years old was
      considered especially acceptable to Jupiter. A black bull, a ram, or
      a boar pig, were offerings for Neptune. A heifer, or a sheep, for
      Minerva. To Ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn. The
      goat to Bacchus, because he fed on vines. Diana was propitiated with
      a stag; and to Venus the dove was consecrated. The infernal and evil
      deities were to be appeased with black victims. The most acceptable
      of all sacrifices was the heifer of a year old, which had never
      borne the yoke. It was to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and
      without blemish."--"Elgin Marbles," vol. i. p. 78.

   93 --_Idomeneus,_ son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having vowed,
      during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune
      the first creature that should present itself to his eye on the
      Cretan shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow.

   94 --_Tydeus' son, i.e._ Diomed.

   95 That is, Ajax, the son of Oileus, a Locrian. He must be
      distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis.

   96 A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word
      _unbid,_ in this line. Even Plato, "Sympos." p. 315, has found some
      curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was
      there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one
      brother-king visiting another without a formal invitation?

   97 Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers
      about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by
      the river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, "Georgics," vol. i.
      383, sq.

   98 --_Scamander,_ or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising, according
      to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same hill with
      the Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at Sigaeum;
      everything tends to identify it with Mendere, as Wood, Rennell, and
      others maintain; the Mendere is 40 miles long, 300 feet broad, deep
      in the time of flood, nearly dry in the summer. Dr. Clarke
      successfully combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to
      have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source
      of the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now
      Kusdaghy; receives the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is
      very muddy, and flows through marshes. Between the Scamander and
      Simois, Homer's Troy is supposed to have stood: this river,
      according to Homer, was called Xanthus by the gods, Scamander by
      men. The waters of the Scamander had the singular property of giving
      a beautiful colour to the hair or wool of such animals as bathed in
      them; hence the three goddesses, Minerva, Juno, and Venus, bathed
      there before they appeared before Paris to obtain the golden apple:
      the name Xanthus, "yellow," was given to the Scamander, from the
      peculiar colour of its waters, still applicable to the Mendere, the
      yellow colour of whose waters attracts the attention of travellers.

   99 It should be "his _chest_ like Neptune." The torso of Neptune, in
      the "Elgin Marbles," No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for
      its breadth and massiveness of development.

          100 "Say first, for heav'n hides nothing from thy view."

                                                  --"Paradise Lost," i. 27.

        "Ma di' tu, Musa, come i primi danni
        Mandassero a Cristiani, e di quai parti:
        Tu 'l sai; ma di tant' opra a noi si lunge
        Debil aura di fama appena giunge."

                                                     --"Gier. Lib." iv. 19.

  101 "The Catalogue is, perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of
      which a claim to separate authorship has been most plausibly urged.
      Although the example of Homer has since rendered some such formal
      enumeration of the forces engaged, a common practice in epic poems
      descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute a
      statistical detail can neither be considered as imperatively
      required, nor perhaps such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest
      itself to the mind of a poet. Yet there is scarcely any portion of
      the Iliad where both historical and internal evidence are more
      clearly in favour of a connection from the remotest period, with the
      remainder of the work. The composition of the Catalogue, whensoever
      it may have taken place, necessarily presumes its author's
      acquaintance with a previously existing Iliad. It were impossible
      otherwise to account for the harmony observable in the recurrence of
      so vast a number of proper names, most of them historically
      unimportant, and not a few altogether fictitious: or of so many
      geographical and genealogical details as are condensed in these few
      hundred lines, and incidentally scattered over the thousands which
      follow: equally inexplicable were the pointed allusions occurring in
      this episode to events narrated in the previous and subsequent text,
      several of which could hardly be of traditional notoriety, but
      through the medium of the Iliad."--Mure, "Language and Literature of
      Greece," vol. i. p. 263.

  102 --_Twice Sixty:_ "Thucydides observes that the Boeotian vessels,
      which carried one hundred and twenty men each, were probably meant
      to be the largest in the fleet, and those of Philoctetes, carrying
      fifty each, the smallest. The average would be eighty-five, and
      Thucydides supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated
      themselves; and that very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere
      passengers or landsmen. In short, we have in the Homeric
      descriptions the complete picture of an Indian or African war canoe,
      many of which are considerably larger than the largest scale
      assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total number of the Greek
      ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, although
      in point of fact there are only eleven hundred and eighty-six in the
      Catalogue, the amount of the army, upon the foregoing average, will
      be about a hundred and two thousand men. The historian considers
      this a small force as representing all Greece. Bryant, comparing it
      with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large as to prove the
      entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and
      calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful
      perusal."--Coleridge, p. 211, sq.

  103 The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was called
      Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i. p.
      3, well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various
      towns and cities by the names by which they were known in his own
      time.

          104 "Adam, the goodliest man of men since born,
        His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.'

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 323.

  105 --_Ãsetes' tomb._ Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and of
      a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land marks.
      See my notes to my prose translations of the "Odyssey," ii. p. 21,
      or on Eur. "Alcest." vol. i. p. 240.

  106 --_Zeleia,_ another name for Lycia. The inhabitants were greatly
      devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller, "Dorians," vol. i. p.
      248.

  107 --_Barbarous tongues._ "Various as were the dialects of the
      Greeks--and these differences existed not only between the several
      tribes, but even between neighbouring cities--they yet acknowledged
      in their language that they formed but one nation were but branches
      of the same family. Homer has 'men of other tongues:' and yet Homer
      had no general name for the Greek nation."--Heeren, "Ancient Greece,"
      Section vii. p. 107, sq.

        _  108 The cranes._
        "Marking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes
        Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried:
        And each with outstretch'd neck his rank maintains,
        In marshall'd order through th' ethereal void."

                            Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe's Life, Appendix.

      See Cary's Dante: "Hell," canto v.

        _  109 Silent, breathing rage._
          "Thus they,
        Breathing united force with fixed thought,
        Moved on in silence."

                                             "Paradise Lost," book i. 559.

          110 "As when some peasant in a bushy brake
        Has with unwary footing press'd a snake;
        He starts aside, astonish'd, when he spies
        His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 510.

  111 Dysparis, i.e. unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the evils
      which resulted from his having been brought up, despite the omens
      which attended his birth.

  112 The following scene, in which Homer has contrived to introduce so
      brilliant a sketch of the Grecian warriors, has been imitated by
      Euripides, who in his "Phoenissae" represents Antigone surveying the
      opposing champions from a high tower, while the paedagogus describes
      their insignia and details their histories.

  113 --_No wonder,_ &c. Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have
      appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto. Valer Max.
      iii. 7.

  114 The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and sufferings
      of women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the Grecian
      heroes. A nation of courageous, hardy, indefatigable women, dwelling
      apart from men, permitting only a short temporary intercourse, for
      the purpose of renovating their numbers, burning out their right
      breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the bow freely;
      this was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of the
      poet, and a theme eminently popular with his hearers. We find these
      warlike females constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and
      universally accepted as past realities in the Iliad. When Priam
      wishes to illustrate emphatically the most numerous host in which he
      ever found himself included, he tells us that it was assembled in
      Phrygia, on the banks of the Sangarius, for the purpose of resisting
      the formidable Amazons. When Bellerophon is to be employed in a
      deadly and perilous undertaking, by those who prudently wished to
      procure his death, he is despatched against the Amazons.--Grote, vol.
      i p. 289.

  115 --_Antenor,_ like Ãneas, had always been favourable to the
      restoration of Helen. Liv 1. 2.

          116 "His lab'ring heart with sudden rapture seized
        He paus'd, and on the ground in silence gazed.
        Unskill'd and uninspired he seems to stand,
        Nor lifts the eye, nor graceful moves the hand:
        Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung,
        Pours the full tide of eloquence along;
        While from his lips the melting torrent flows,
        Soft as the fleeces of descending snows.
        Now stronger notes engage the listening crowd,
        Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud,
        Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud."

                                        Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," 148, 99.

  117 Duport, "Gnomol. Homer," p. 20, well observes that this comparison
      may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory.
      It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of Ulysses.

  118 --_Her brothers' doom._ They perished in combat with Lynceus and
      Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22. Virgil
      and others, however, make them share immortality by turns.

  119 Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain during
      this war. Cf. Ãn, vi. 487.

  120 --_Scaea's gates,_ rather _Scaean gates,_ _i.e._ the left-hand gates.

  121 This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras descending
      to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not expire.

  122 --_Nor pierced._

        "This said, his feeble hand a jav'lin threw,
        Which, flutt'ring, seemed to loiter as it flew,
        Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
        And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 742.

_  123 Reveal'd the queen._

        "Thus having said, she turn'd and made appear
        Her neck refulgent and dishevell'd hair,
        Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach'd the ground,
        And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
        In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
        And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, i. 556.

  124 --_Cranae's isle, i.e._ Athens. See the "Schol." and Alberti's
      "Hesychius," vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its
      early kings, Cranaus.

  125 --_The martial maid._ In the original, "Minerva Alalcomeneis," _i.e.
      the defender,_ so called from her temple at Alalcomene in Boeotia.

  126 "Anything for a quiet life!"

  127 --_Argos._ The worship of Juno at Argos was very celebrated in
      ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of that
      city. Apul. Met., vi. p. 453; Servius on Virg. Ãn., i. 28.

  128 --_A wife and sister._

        "But I, who walk in awful state above
        The majesty of heav'n, the sister-wife of Jove."

                                                 Dryden's "Virgil," i. 70.

      So Apuleius, _l. c._ speaks of her as "Jovis germana et conjux, and
      so Horace, Od. iii. 3, 64, "conjuge me Jovis et sorore."

          129 "Thither came Uriel, gleaming through the even
        On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star
        In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
        Impress the air, and shows the mariner
        From what point of his compass to beware
        Impetuous winds."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 555.

  130 --_Ãsepus' flood._ A river of Mysia, rising from Mount Cotyius, in
      the southern part of the chain of Ida.

  131 --_Zelia,_ a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida.

  132 --_Podaleirius_ and _Machaon_ are the leeches of the Grecian army,
      highly prized and consulted by all the wounded chiefs. Their medical
      renown was further prolonged in the subsequent poem of Arktinus, the
      Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as unrivalled in
      surgical operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and
      appreciating morbid symptoms. It was Podaleirius who first noticed
      the glaring eyes and disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide
      of Ajax.

      "Galen appears uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus) was
      originally a god, or whether he was first a man and then became
      afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date of
      his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical ages the descendants
      of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The many families or
      gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves to the study and
      practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt near the temples of
      Asklepius, whither sick and suffering men came to obtain relief--all
      recognized the god not merely as the object of their common worship,
      but also as their actual progenitor."--Grote vol. i. p. 248.

          133 "The plant she bruises with a stone, and stands
        Tempering the juice between her ivory hands
        This o'er her breast she sheds with sovereign art
        And bathes with gentle touch the wounded part
        The wound such virtue from the juice derives,
        At once the blood is stanch'd, the youth revives."

                                               "Orlando Furioso,"  book 1.

  134 --_Well might I wish._

        "Would heav'n (said he) my strength and youth recall,
        Such as I was beneath Praeneste's wall--
        Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
        And set whole heaps of conquer'd shields on fire;
        When Herilus in single fight I slew,
        Whom with three lives Feronia did endue."

                                               Dryden's Virgil, viii. 742.

  135 --_Sthenelus,_ a son of Capaneus, one of the Epigoni. He was one of
      the suitors of Helen, and is said to have been one of those who
      entered Troy inside the wooden horse.

  136 --_Forwarn'd the horrors._ The same portent has already been
      mentioned. To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this
      superstition.

  137 --_Sevenfold city,_ Boeotian Thebes, which had seven gates.

  138 --_As when the winds._

        "Thus, when a black-brow'd gust begins to rise,
        White foam at first on the curl'd ocean fries;
        Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies,
        Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
        The muddy billow o'er the clouds is thrown."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 736.

            139 "Stood
        Like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved;
        His stature reach'd the sky."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 986.

  140 The Abantes seem to have been of Thracian origin.

  141 I may, once for all, remark that Homer is most anatomically correct
      as to the parts of the body in which a wound would be immediately
      mortal.

  142 --_Ãnus,_ a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness.

  143 Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7:

        "Nuovo favor del cielo in lui niluce
        E 'l fa grande, et angusto oltre il costume.
        Gl' empie d' honor la faccia, e vi riduce
        Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume."

          144 "Or deluges, descending on the plains,
        Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains
        Of lab'ring oxen, and the peasant's gains;
        Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away
        Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguish'd prey."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil ii. 408.

  145 --_From mortal mists._

          "But to nobler sights
        Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," xi. 411.

  146 --_The race of those._

        "A pair of coursers, born of heav'nly breed,
        Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;
        Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
        By substituting mares produced on earth,
        Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.

                                           Dryden's Virgil, vii. 386, sqq.

  147 The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier
      times, is by no means confined to Homer.

  148 --_Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor,_ or blood of the gods.

        "A stream of nect'rous humour issuing flow'd,
        Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," vi. 339.

  149 This was during the wars with the Titans.

  150 --_Amphitryon's son,_ Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of
      Amphitryon.

  151 --_Ãgiale_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthon's
      Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in
      revenge for the wound she had received from her husband.

  152 --_Pherae,_ a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly.

  153 --_Tlepolemus,_ son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his native
      country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of
      Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here
      he was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his
      death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the
      victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar.

  154 These heroes' names have since passed into a kind of proverb,
      designating the _oi polloi_ or mob.

  155 --_Spontaneous open._

        "Veil'd with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light
        Flew through the midst of heaven; th' angelic quires,
        On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
        Through all th' empyreal road; till at the gate
        Of heaven arrived, the gate self-open'd wide,
        On golden hinges turning."

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 250.

          156 "Till Morn,
        Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
        Unbarr'd the gates of light."

                                                  --"Paradise Lost," vi, 2.

  157 --_Far as a shepherd._ "With what majesty and pomp does Homer exalt
      his deities! He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent
      of the world. And who is there, that, considering the exceeding
      greatness of the space would not with reason cry out that 'If the
      steeds of the deity were to take a second leap, the world would want
      room for it'?"--Longinus, Section 8.

  158 "No trumpets, or any other instruments of sound, are used in the
      Homeric action itself; but the trumpet was known, and is introduced
      for the purpose of illustration as employed in war. Hence arose the
      value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable
      officer... In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made
      of the service rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the
      battle of Honain was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas,
      the uncle of Mohammed," &c.--Coleridge, p. 213.

          159 "Long had the wav'ring god the war delay'd,
        While Greece and Troy alternate own'd his aid."

                                    Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," vi. 761, sq.

  160 --_Paeon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and
      Machaon were to the Grecian heroes.

  161 --_Arisbe,_ a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas.

  162 --_Pedasus,_ a town near Pylos.

  163 --_Rich heaps of brass._ "The halls of Alkinous and Menelaus glitter
      with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet
      unemployed metal--gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the
      treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is
      unknown in the Homeric age--the trade carried on being one of barter.
      In reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that
      the Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron,
      to be employed for arms, both offensive and defensive. By what
      process the copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the
      purpose of the warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for
      these objects belongs to a later age."--Grote, vol. ii. p. 142.

  164 --_Oh impotent,_ &c. "In battle, quarter seems never to have been
      given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon
      reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point
      of sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the
      sword."--Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181

          165 "The ruthless steel, impatient of delay,
        Forbade the sire to linger out the day.
        It struck the bending father to the earth,
        And cropt the wailing infant at the birth.
        Can innocents the rage of parties know,
        And they who ne'er offended find a foe?"

                                                     Rowe's Lucan, bk. ii.

          166 "Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress'd with woe,
        To Pallas' fane in long procession go,
        In hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe:
        They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair,
        And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, i. 670

  167 The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well illustrated
      by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: "The poet's method
      of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious manner
      his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example,
      one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task
      is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain interval
      is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which
      interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
      continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
      while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
      account of the mission is resumed."

  168 --_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a
      hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
      times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

  169 --_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia.

  170 From this "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon, hypochondria received
      the name of "Morbus Bellerophonteus." See my notes in my prose
      translation, p. 112. The "Aleian field," _i.e._ "the plain of
      wandering," was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
      Cilicia.

  171 --_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common
      proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ left hand.

  173 --_In fifty chambers._

        "The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
        So large a promise of a progeny,)
        The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, ii.658

  174 --_O would kind earth,_ &c. "It is apparently a sudden, irregular
      burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he
      regrets that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a
      mantle of stones. This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal
      modes of punishment for great public offences. It may have been
      originally connected with the same feeling--the desire of avoiding
      the pollution of bloodshed--which seems to have suggested the
      practice of burying prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by
      their side. Though Homer makes no mention of this horrible usage,
      the example of the Roman Vestals affords reasons for believing that,
      in ascribing it to the heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic
      tradition."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq.

  175 --_Paris' lofty dome._ "With respect to the private dwellings, which
      are oftenest described, the poet's language barely enables us to
      form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no
      conception of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect
      on the eye. It seems indeed probable, from the manner in which he
      dwells on their metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of
      proportion was but little required or understood, and it is,
      perhaps, strength and convenience, rather than elegance, that he
      means to commend, in speaking of the fair house which Paris had
      built for himself with the aid of the most skilful masons of
      Troy."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 231.

  176 --_The wanton courser._

        "Come destrier, che da le regie stalle
          Ove a l'usa de l'arme si riserba,
        Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle
          Va tragl' armenti, o al fiume usato, o a l'herba."

                                                        Gier, Lib. ix. 75.

  177 --_Casque._ The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of
      which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind
      of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the
      helmet.

  178 --_Athenian maid:_ Minerva.

  179 --_Celadon,_ a river of Elis.

  180 --_Oileus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oileus, in contradistinction to
      Ajax, son of Telamon.

  181 --_In the general's helm._ It was customary to put the lots into a
      helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his
      choice.

  182 --_God of Thrace._ Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian
      epithet. Hence "Mavortia Moenia."

  183 --_Grimly he smiled._

          "And death
        Grinn'd horribly a ghastly smile."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 845.

          "There Mavors stands
        Grinning with ghastly feature."

                                                  --Carey's Dante: Hell, v.

          184 "Sete o guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,
        Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti,
        Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte
        Le ragioni, e 'l riposo, e de la notte."

                                                       --Gier. Lib. vi. 51.

  185 It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of
      food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
      See Virg. Ãn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a "double
      portion." Gen. xliii. 34.

  186 --_Embattled walls._ "Another essential basis of mechanical unity in
      the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in the
      seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that
      the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during
      nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical
      one: 'So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to
      keep every foe at a distance.' The disasters consequent on his
      secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection.
      Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion
      occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent
      feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the
      Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of
      it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem."--Mure,
      vol. i., p. 257.

  187 --_What cause of fear,_ &c.

        "Seest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain
        Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 304.

  188 --_In exchange._ These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman
      lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Section 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
      mention of barter.

  189 "A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the
      narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of
      the eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the
      battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is
      withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily
      in view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the
      specially authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two
      contumacious deities, described as boldly setting his commands at
      defiance, but checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while
      the other divine warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos
      are so active in support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly
      allude to the supreme edict as the cause of their present
      inactivity."--Mure, vol. i. p 257. See however, Muller, "Greek
      Literature," ch. v. Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252.

          190 "As far removed from God and light of heaven,
        As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole."

                                                         --"Paradise Lost."

        "E quanto e da le stelle al basso inferno,
        Tanto e piu in su de la stellata spera"

                                                         --Gier. Lib. i. 7.

      "Some of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to
      imply that he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is not
      necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any
      such inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty
      pillars which keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from
      the manner in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth
      of Tartarus, that the region of light was thought to have certain
      bounds. The summit of the Thessalian Olympus was regarded as the
      highest point on the earth, and it is not always carefully
      distinguished from the aerian regions above The idea of a seat of
      the gods--perhaps derived from a more ancient tradition, in which it
      was not attached to any geographical site--seems to be indistinctly
      blended in the poet's mind with that of the real
      mountain."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 217, sq.

          191 "Now lately heav'n, earth, another world
        Hung e'er my realm, link'd in a golden chain
        To that side heav'n."

                                               --"Paradise Lost," ii. 1004.

  192 --_His golden scales._

        "Jove now, sole arbiter of peace and war,
        Held forth the fatal balance from afar:
        Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail,
        Till Troy descending fix'd the doubtful scale."

                                       Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.

        "Th' Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
        Hung forth in heav'n his golden scales,
        Wherein all things created first he weighed;
        The pendulous round earth, with balanced air
        In counterpoise; now ponders all events,
        Battles and realms. In these he puts two weights,
        The sequel each of parting and of fight:
        The latter quick up flew, and kick'd the beam."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," iv. 496.

  193 --_And now,_ &c.

          "And now all heaven
        Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;
        Had not th' Almighty Father, where he sits
        ... foreseen."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 669.

  194 --_Gerenian Nestor._ The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the name
      of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies
      honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B. 336; Strabo, viii. p.
      340.

  195 --_Ãgae, Helice._ Both these towns were conspicuous for their worship
      of Neptune.

  196 --_As full blown,_ &c.

        "Il suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso,
        E in atto si gentil languir tremanti
        Gl' occhi, e cader siu 'l tergo il collo mira."

                                                        Gier. Lib. ix. 85.

  197 --_Ungrateful,_ because the cause in which they were engaged was
      unjust.

        "Struck by the lab'ring priests' uplifted hands
        The victims fall: to heav'n they make their pray'r,
        The curling vapours load the ambient air.
        But vain their toil: the pow'rs who rule the skies
        Averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 527, sqq.

          198 "As when about the silver moon, when aire is free from
                    winde,
        And stars shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on the
                    brows
        Of all steepe hills and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows,
        And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight;
        When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light,
        And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherd's
                    heart."

                                                                  Chapman.

  199 This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil. p. 358, was
      not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but "a great and
      general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval
      of Jove."

  200 Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and
      respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, "The
      Homeric Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with
      any power of peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the
      king, but solely for his information and guidance."

  201 In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive
      presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his
      exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the
      income of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot.
      iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, 'The feudal
      aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time
      answered the purpose.' (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189)
      This fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness.
      Plato, however, (De Rep. vi. 4), says, "We cannot commend Phoenix,
      the tutor of Achilles, as if he spoke correctly, when counselling
      him to accept of presents and assist the Greeks, but, without
      presents, not to desist from his wrath, nor again, should we commend
      Achilles himself, or approve of his being so covetous as to receive
      presents from Agamemnon," &c.

  202 It may be observed, that, brief as is the mention of Briseis in the
      Iliad, and small the part she plays--what little is said is
      pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of
      Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well
      contrasted with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero.

  203 --_Laodice._ Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer,
      among the daughters of Agamemnon.

  204 "Agamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns
      inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by
      presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in
      them, than an authority over them. And the same thing may be
      intimated when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the
      Dolopes of Phthia, on Phoenix."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i Section
      6, p. 162, note.

  205 --_Pray in deep silence._ Rather: "use well-omened words;" or, as
      Kennedy has explained it, "Abstain from expressions unsuitable to
      the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might
      defeat the object of their supplications."

  206 --_Purest hands._ This is one of the most ancient superstitions
      respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
      tradition.

  207 It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in
      piratical expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of
      which Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident
      that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
      expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capital of Achilles' Thessalian domains.

  209 --_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the northern bank of the lake Ãpais,
      which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of
      Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon" (Grote,
      vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
      "As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and
      kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of
      alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels
      came to be either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy,
      the water accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more
      than one ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of
      Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount
      Hyphanteion." (Ibid.)

  210 The phrase "hundred gates," &c., seems to be merely expressive of a
      great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162.

  211 Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Select
      Translations, p 88).--

          "Many gifts he gave, and o'er
        Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms
        He brought an infant, on my bosom laid
        The precious charge, and anxiously enjoin'd
        That I should rear thee as my own with all
        A parent's love. I fail'd not in my trust
        And oft, while round my neck thy hands were lock'd,
        From thy sweet lips the half articulate sound
        Of Father came; and oft, as children use,
        Mewling and puking didst thou drench my tunic."

      "This description," observes my learned friend (notes, p. 121) "is
      taken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating which, Pope,
      with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age
      of Anne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting)
      circumstance."

          "And the wine
        Held to thy lips, and many a time in fits
        Of infant frowardness the purple juice
        Rejecting thou hast deluged all my vest,
        And fill'd my bosom."

                                                                  --Cowper.

  212 --_Where Calydon._ For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too
      long to be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for
      the authorities, see my notes to the prose translation, p. 166.

  213 "_Gifts can conquer_"--It is well observed by Bishop Thirlwall,
      "Greece," vol. i. p, 180, that the law of honour among the Greeks
      did not compel them to treasure up in their memory the offensive
      language which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary,
      nor to conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away
      by blood. Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing
      to accept a pecuniary compensation."

  214 "The boon of sleep."--Milton

          215 "All else of nature's common gift partake:
        Unhappy Dido was alone awake."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, iv. 767.

  216 --_The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus.

  217 --_Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of woollen stuffing, pressed in
      between the straps, to protect the head, and make the helmet fit
      close.

  218 "All the circumstances of this action--the night, Rhesus buried in a
      profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand hanging over
      the head of that prince--furnished Homer with the idea of this
      fiction, which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were,
      beholding his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom.
      This image is very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no
      farther than to see confusedly what environs him, and to think it
      not a reality but a dream."--Pope.

        "There's one did laugh in his sleep, and one cry'd murder;
        They wak'd each other."

                                                               --_Macbeth._

          219 "Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
        And beams of early light the heavens o'erspread."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, iv. 639

  220 --_Red drops of blood._ "This phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the
      poet's imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched. It is one,
      however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in
      the climate of Greece."--Mure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix.
      15:

        "La terra in vece del notturno gelo
        Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne."

          221 "No thought of flight,
        None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
        That argued fear."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 236.

  222 --_One of love._ Although a bastard brother received only a small
      portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated. Priam
      appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in
      the Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note.

          223 "Circled with foes as when a packe of bloodie jackals cling
        About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a hunter's bow
        Whose escape his nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth
                    flow,
        And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his
                    wound)
        Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round,
        And teare his flesh--when instantly fortune sends in the powers
        Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours.
        So they around Ulysses prest."

                                                                 --Chapman.

  224 --_Simois, railing,_ &c.

          "In those bloody fields
        Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
        Of heroes."

                                                 --Dryden's Virgil, i. 142.

          225 "Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
        Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
        Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
        Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,
        And heaves the building from the solid base."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 825.

  226 --_Why boast we._

          "Wherefore do I assume
        These royalties and not refuse to reign,
        Refusing to accept as great a share
        Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him
        Who reigns, and so much to him due
        Of hazard more, as he above the rest
        High honour'd sits."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 450.

  227 --_Each equal weight._

          "Long time in even scale
        The battle hung."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 245.

          228 "He on his impious foes right onward drove,
        _Gloomy as night._"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," vi. 831

  229 --_Renown'd for justice and for length of days,_ Arrian. de Exp.
      Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people,
      which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness.
      Some authors have regarded the phrase "Hippomolgian," _i.e._
      "milking their mares," as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes,
      since the oldest of the Samatian nomads made their mares' milk one
      of their chief articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this
      passage, has occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as
      we read it, either "long-lived," or "bowless," the latter epithet
      indicating that they did not depend upon archery for subsistence.

  230 Compare Chapman's quaint, bold verses:--

        "And as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winter's flood
        Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,
        Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock,
        Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke,
        And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,
        And then (tho' never so impelled), it stirs not any way:--
        So Hector,--"

  231 This book forms a most agreeable interruption to The continuous
      round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is
      as well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many
      notes unnecessary.

  232 --_Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed.

  233 Compare Tasso:--

        Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille
        Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
        Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille
        Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci."

                                                        Gier. Lib. xvi. 25

  234 Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso,
      bk. vi.

          235 "Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main--
        Around my person wait, and bear my train:
        Succeed my wish, and second my design,
        The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine."

                                         Dryden's Virgil, Ãn. i. 107, seq.

  236 --_And Minos._ "By Homer, Minos is described as the son of Jupiter,
      and of the daughter of Phoenix, whom all succeeding authors name
      Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
      Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
      Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
      his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
      recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of
      Asterius, as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus
      connected with a colony said to have been led into Creta by
      Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is related either to have
      crossed over from Thessaly, or to have embarked at Malea after
      having led his followers by land into Laconia."--Thirlwall, p. 136,
      seq.

  237 Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
      first parents:--

          "Underneath the violet,
        Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
        'Broider'd the ground."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 700.

  238 --_He lies protected,_

        "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
        By angels many and strong, who interpos'd
        Defence, while others bore him on their shields
        Back to his chariot, where it stood retir'd
        From off the files of war; there they him laid,
        Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."

                                            "Paradise Lost," vi. 335, seq.

  239 --_The brazen dome._ See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

  240 --_For, by the gods! who flies._ Observe the bold ellipsis of "he
      cries," and the transition from the direct to the oblique
      construction. So in Milton:--

        "Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood,
        Both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd
        The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
        Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
        And starry pole.--Thou also mad'st the night,
        Maker omnipotent, and thou the day."

                                         Milton, "Paradise Lost," Book iv.

  241 --_So some tall rock._

        "But like a rock unmov'd, a rock that braves
        The raging tempest, and the rising waves--
        Propp'd on himself he stands: his solid sides
        Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 809.

  242 Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he
      leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the
      Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on
      Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in
      the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus.

  243 --_His best beloved._ The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall
      (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the
      friendship subsisting between these two heroes--

      "One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character,
      is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and
      durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the
      earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
      comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
      the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
      maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
      companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
      traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
      same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
      wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
      die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
      not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
      which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
      description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
      presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
      Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
      owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
      dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
      period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
      Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose
      love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his
      higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which
      united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as
      the persons themselves are less important, it is kept more in the
      back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the same light. The
      idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought complete,
      without such a brother in arms by his side."--Thirlwall, Greece, vol.
      i. p. 176, seq.

          244 "As hungry wolves with raging appetite,
        Scour through the fields, ne'er fear the stormy night--
        Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
        And long to temper their dry chaps in blood--
        So rush'd we forth at once."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, ii. 479.

  245 --_The destinies ordain._--"In the mythology, also, of the Iliad,
      purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously
      involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly
      equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter
      is popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is
      assigned to fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men
      is absolute and uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character
      of the Homeric deity, and it is very necessary that the student of
      Greek literature should bear it constantly in mind. A strong
      instance in the Iliad itself to illustrate this position, is the
      passage where Jupiter laments to Juno the approaching death of
      Sarpedon. 'Alas me!' says he 'since it is fated (moira) that
      Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should be slain by Patroclus, the
      son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is divided within me while I
      ruminate it in my mind, whether having snatched him up from out of
      the lamentable battle, I should not at once place him alive in the
      fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether I should now destroy him
      by the hands of the son of Menoetius!' To which Juno answers--'Dost
      thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man, long since destined by
      fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do it--but we, the rest of the gods,
      do not sanction it.' Here it is clear from both speakers, that
      although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter might still,
      if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the reach of
      any such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter
      himself would destroy him by the hands of another."--Coleridge, p.
      156. seq.

  246 --_Thrice at the battlements._ "The art military of the Homeric age
      is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
      personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
      ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights
      of romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
      captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a
      ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself
      was accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of
      earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in
      armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
      assistance from their allies to the very end."--Coleridge, p. 212.

  247 --_Ciconians._--A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

  248 --_They wept._

        "Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
        And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
        He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
        Weeps his associates and his master slain."

                                         Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

        "Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
        But pensive herds that for their master low,
        Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
        Unmindful of their pasture and their love."

                                         Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

        "To close the pomp, Ãthon, the steed of state,
        Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
        Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
        He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, bk. ii

  249 --_Some brawny bull._

        "Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring
        Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow
        Hath struck him, but unable to proceed
        Plunges on either side."

                                             --Carey's Dante: Hell, c. xii.

  250 This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the regular
      narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the
      lamentations of Achilles.

  251 --_Far in the deep._ So Oceanus hears the lamentations of Prometheus,
      in the play of Ãschylus, and comes from the depths of the sea to
      comfort him.

  252 Opuntia, a city of Locris.

  253 Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his
      description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr.
      Dyce's version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be
      introduced.

        "In the wide circle of the shield were seen
        Refulgent images of various forms,
        The work of Vulcan; who had there described
        The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,
        The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart
        In different stations; and you there might view
        The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven,
        And, under them, the vast expanse of air,
        In which, with outstretch'd wings, the long-beak'd bird
        Winnow'd the gale, as if instinct with life.
        Around the shield the waves of ocean flow'd,
        The realms of Tethys, which unnumber'd streams,
        In azure mazes rolling o'er the earth,
        Seem'd to augment."

  254 --_On seats of stone._ "Several of the old northern Sagas represent
      the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great
      stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring"-- Grote,
      ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in The
      heroic times, see Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

  255 --_Another part,_ &c.

          "And here
        Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
        Were heroes lying with their slaughter'd steeds
        Upon the ground incarnadin'd with blood.
        Stern stalked Bellona, smear'd with reeking gore,
        Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
        And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
        Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
        Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
        Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
        Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
        And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
        That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
        Such were the horrors of dire war."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  256 --_A field deep furrowed._

        "Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,
        Each with a sharp-tooth'd sickle in his hand,
        Work'd busily, and, as the harvest fell,
        Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
        Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
        The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
        The plough were drawing, and the furrow'd glebe
        Was black behind them, while with goading wand
        The active youths impell'd them. Here a feast
        Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
        A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
        As if endued with life."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  257 Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
      compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
      Hesiod. He remarks that, "with two or three exceptions, the imagery
      differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the
      difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether
      for the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs
      no exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the
      work. The Hesiodic images are huddled together without connection or
      congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the
      Centaurs and Lapithae;-- but the gap is wide indeed between them and
      Apollo with the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial
      harmonies; whence however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the
      Gorgons, and other images of war, over an arm of the sea, in which
      the sporting dolphins, the fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the
      shore with his casting net, are minutely represented. As to the
      Hesiodic images themselves, the leading remark is, that they catch
      at beauty by ornament, and at sublimity by exaggeration; and upon
      the untenable supposition of the genuineness of this poem, there is
      this curious peculiarity, that, in the description of scenes of
      rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is decisive--while in those of
      war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps, that the Hesiodic poet
      has more than once the advantage."

  258 "This legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in the
      Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas
      familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes
      and the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned
      subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the
      Hellenes,--a being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by
      Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the
      commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
      reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are
      brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives
      in marriage Hebe."--Grote, vol. i. p. 128.

  259 --_Ambrosia._

          "The blue-eyed maid,
        In ev'ry breast new vigour to infuse.
        Brings nectar temper'd with ambrosial dews."

                                          Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

  260 "Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
      stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
      upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
      cloud is not rent under them." Job xxvi. 6-8.

          261 "Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
        All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,
        Slain by Jove's wrath, and led by Hermes' rod,
        Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

  262 These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be
      delayed, but never wholly set aside.

  263 It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to
      behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

          264 "Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose,
        In humble vales they built their soft abodes."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, iii. 150.

  265 --_Along the level seas._ Compare Virgil's description of Camilla,
      who

        "Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain,
        Flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
        She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along,
        Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung."

                                                        Dryden, vii. 1100.

  266 --_The future father._ "Ãneas and Antenor stand distinguished from
      the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy
      with the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as
      treacherous collusion,--a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though
      emphatically repelled, in the Ãneas of Virgil."--Grote, i. p. 427.

  267 Neptune thus recounts his services to Ãneas:

        "When your Ãneas fought, but fought with odds
        Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
        I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
        Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secured his flight--
        Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
        The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, v. 1058.

  268 --_On Polydore._ Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that Polydore
      was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for protection,
      being the youngest of Priam's sons, and that he was treacherously
      murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent with him.

  269 "Perhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of poetical
      fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the Iliad,
      he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles, and
      afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the hero's aid. The
      overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation in
      the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
      Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to
      be easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
      mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
      suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
      Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same
      ready explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the
      flood at the critical moment when the hero's destruction appeared
      imminent, might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel,
      be ascribed to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all
      atmospheric moisture."--Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

  270 Wood has observed, that "the circumstance of a falling tree, which
      is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other, affords
      a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander."

  271 --_Ignominious._ Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of
      battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

  272 --_Beneath a caldron._

        "So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
        The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
        Above the brims they force their fiery way;
        Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 644.

  273 "This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order
      of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently
      among the incidents of the Mythical world."--Grote, vol. i. p. 156.

  274 --_Not half so dreadful._

          "On the other side,
        Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
        Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
        That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
        In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
        Shakes pestilence and war."

                                                 --Paradise Lost," xi. 708.

  275 "And thus his own undaunted mind explores."--"Paradise Lost," vi.
      113.

  276 The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties of
      the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a
      princess, in the heroic times.

  277 --_Hesper shines with keener light._

        "Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
        If better thou belong not to the dawn."

                                                  "Paradise Lost," v. 166.

  278 Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was
      slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the
      unerring auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the
      Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued
      and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
      Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it
      with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
      immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine.

  279 --_Astyanax,_ i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that
      Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have
      copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus.

  280 This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book, but
      it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for
      comparison.

  281 --_Thrice in order led._ This was a frequent rite at funerals. The
      Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio._ Plutarch
      states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to
      the memory of Achilles himself.

  282 --_And swore._ Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
      witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436.

          283 "O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
        Art thou so late return'd for our defence?
        Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
        With length of labours, and with, toils of war?
        After so many funerals of thy own,
        Art thou restored to thy declining town?
        But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
        Deforms the manly features of thy face?"

                                                          Dryden, xi. 369.

  284 --_Like a thin smoke._ Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

        "In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
        In sweet embraces--ah! no longer thine!
        She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
        Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air."

                                                                   Dryden.

  285 So Milton:--

          "So eagerly the fiend
        O'er bog, o'er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
        With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
        And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," ii. 948.

          286 "An ancient forest, for the work design'd
        (The shady covert of the savage kind).
        The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
        Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow'ring pride
        Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
        And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
        High trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown
        Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, vi. 261.

  287 --_He vowed._ This was a very ancient custom.

  288 The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of
      the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

  289 On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations,
      see Mallet, p. 213.

  290 --_And calls the spirit._ Such was the custom anciently, even at the
      Roman funerals.

        "Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
        Paternal ashes, now revived in vain."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 106.

  291 Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral
      from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
      comparison:--

        "The haughty Dares in the lists appears:
        Walking he strides, his head erected bears:
        His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
        And loud applauses echo through the field.
        *          *          *          *
        Such Dares was, and such he strode along,
        And drew the wonder of the gazing throng
        His brawny breast and ample chest he shows;
        His lifted arms around his head he throws,
        And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
        His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,
        No one dares answer to the proud demand.
        Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
        Already he devours the promised prize.
        *          *          *          *
        If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
        How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?"

                                             Dryden's Virgil, v. 486, seq.

          292 "The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
        His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
        His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood,
        And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 623.

  293 "Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in
      the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
      object of great interest with the subsequent poets."--Grote, i, p.
      399.

  294 Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of Gabriel,
      "Paradise Lost," bk. v. 266, seq.

          "Down thither prone in flight
        He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
        Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
        Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
        Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
        *           *               *             *
        At once on th' eastern cliff of Paradise
        He lights, and to his proper shape returns
        A seraph wing'd. * * * *
          Like Maia's son he stood,
        And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fill'd
        The circuit wide."

      Virgil, Ãn. iv. 350:--

        "Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
        His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
        And whether o'er the seas or earth he flies,
        With rapid force they bear him down the skies
        But first he grasps within his awful hand
        The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
        With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves;
        With this he drives them from the Stygian waves:
        *           *               *             *
        Thus arm'd, the god begins his airy race,
        And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space."

                                                                   Dryden.

  295 In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of
      Coleridge are well worth reading:--

      "By a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of
      expressing everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most
      peculiar and difficult situations, and to extricate himself from
      them with the completest success. The whole scene between Achilles
      and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose
      of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly
      skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the
      Iliad. Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of
      Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if
      genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil
      the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this
      account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is
      called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the
      poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of
      Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in
      gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and,
      lastly, mentioning Hector's name when he perceives that the hero is
      softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of
      the conqueror. The ego d'eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha
      geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
      Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
      defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
      name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
      only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse
      it into another language."--Coleridge, p. 195.

  296 "Achilles' ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but
      offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
      age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
      vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated
      by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that
      evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured
      man; but made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the
      fate of the body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the
      rites essential to the soul's admission into the more favoured
      regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on
      the dreary shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost
      of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own
      obsequies, shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his
      destroyer must have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which,
      even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
      Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks
      pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights
      of retribution."--Mure, vol. i. 289.

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

        "Here, from the tow'r by stern Ulysses thrown,
        Andromache bewail'd her infant son."

                                           Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

  298 The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and
      interesting view of Helen's character--

      "Few things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
      that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
      also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through
      the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in
      her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which higher
      powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate towards those
      with whom that fault had committed her. I have always thought the
      following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own
      invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest
      passage in the poem. It is another striking instance of that
      refinement of feeling and softness of tone which so generally
      distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the rest."--Classic
      Poets, p. 198, seq.

  299 "And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
      exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
      him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
      his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
      influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of
      his great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a
      few short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself
      to be suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.

      The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the
      Iliad, to the speedy termination of its hero's course, and the moral
      on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among the
      finest evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the whole
      framework of the poem is united."--Mure, vol. i. p 201.

  300 Cowper says,--"I cannot take my leave of this noble poem without
      expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It
      is like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has
      entertained magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not
      contemptuous, yet without much ceremony." Coleridge, p. 227,
      considers the termination of "Paradise Lost" somewhat similar.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***



CREDITS


July 2004

            Posted to Project Gutenberg
            Anne Soulard,
            Juliet Sutherland,
            Charles Franks, and
            The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

September 2006

            Converted to PGTEI v.04
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 6130-8.txt or 6130-8.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/1/3/6130/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org
=======
_(The wand in Lynch's hand flashes: a brass poker. Stephen stands at
the pianola on which sprawl his hat and ashplant. With two fingers he
repeats once more the series of empty fifths. Florry Talbot, a blond
feeble goosefat whore in a tatterdemalion gown of mildewed strawberry,
lolls spreadeagle in the sofacorner, her limp forearm pendent over the
bolster, listening. A heavy stye droops over her sleepy eyelid.)_

KITTY: _(Hiccups again with a kick of her horsed foot)_ O, excuse!

ZOE: _(Promptly)_ Your boy's thinking of you. Tie a knot on your shift.

_(Kitty Ricketts bends her head. Her boa uncoils, slides, glides over
her shoulder, back, arm, chair to the ground. Lynch lifts the curled
caterpillar on his wand. She snakes her neck, nestling. Stephen glances
behind at the squatted figure with its cap back to the front.)_

STEPHEN: As a matter of fact it is of no importance whether Benedetto
Marcello found it or made it. The rite is the poet's rest. It may be an
old hymn to Demeter or also illustrate _Coela enarrant gloriam Domini._
It is susceptible of nodes or modes as far apart as hyperphrygian and
mixolydian and of texts so divergent as priests haihooping round David's
that is Circe's or what am I saying Ceres' altar and David's tip
from the stable to his chief bassoonist about the alrightness of his
almightiness. _Mais nom de nom,_ that is another pair of trousers.
_Jetez la gourme. Faut que jeunesse se passe. (He stops, points at
Lynch's cap, smiles, laughs)_ Which side is your knowledge bump?

THE CAP: _(With saturnine spleen)_ Bah! It is because it is. Woman's
reason. Jewgreek is greekjew. Extremes meet. Death is the highest form
of life. Bah!

STEPHEN: You remember fairly accurately all my errors, boasts, mistakes.
How long shall I continue to close my eyes to disloyalty? Whetstone!

THE CAP: Bah!

STEPHEN: Here's another for you. _(He frowns)_ The reason is because
the fundamental and the dominant are separated by the greatest possible
interval which...

THE CAP: Which? Finish. You can't.

STEPHEN: _(With an effort)_ Interval which. Is the greatest possible
ellipse. Consistent with. The ultimate return. The octave. Which.

THE CAP: Which?

_(Outside the gramophone begins to blare_ The Holy City.)

STEPHEN: _(Abruptly)_ What went forth to the ends of the world to
traverse not itself, God, the sun, Shakespeare, a commercial traveller,
having itself traversed in reality itself becomes that self. Wait a
moment. Wait a second. Damn that fellow's noise in the street. Self
which it itself was ineluctably preconditioned to become. _Ecco!_

LYNCH: _(With a mocking whinny of laughter grins at Bloom and Zoe
Higgins)_ What a learned speech, eh?

ZOE: _(Briskly)_ God help your head, he knows more than you have
forgotten.

_(With obese stupidity Florry Talbot regards Stephen.)_

FLORRY: They say the last day is coming this summer.

KITTY: No!

ZOE: _(Explodes in laughter)_ Great unjust God!

FLORRY: _(Offended)_ Well, it was in the papers about Antichrist. O, my
foot's tickling.

_(Ragged barefoot newsboys, jogging a wagtail kite, patter past,
yelling.)_

THE NEWSBOYS: Stop press edition. Result of the rockinghorse races. Sea
serpent in the royal canal. Safe arrival of Antichrist.

_(Stephen turns and sees Bloom.)_

STEPHEN: A time, times and half a time.

_(Reuben I Antichrist, wandering jew, a clutching hand open on his
spine, stumps forward. Across his loins is slung a pilgrim's wallet from
which protrude promissory notes and dishonoured bills. Aloft over his
shoulder he bears a long boatpole from the hook of which the sodden
huddled mass of his only son, saved from Liffey waters, hangs from
the slack of its breeches. A hobgoblin in the image of Punch Costello,
hipshot, crookbacked, hydrocephalic, prognathic with receding forehead
and Ally Sloper nose, tumbles in somersaults through the gathering
darkness.)_

ALL: What?

THE HOBGOBLIN: _(His jaws chattering, capers to and fro, goggling his
eyes, squeaking, kangaroohopping with outstretched clutching arms, then
all at once thrusts his lipless face through the fork of his thighs) Il
vient! C'est moi! L'homme qui rit! L'homme primigene! (He whirls round
and round with dervish howls) Sieurs et dames, faites vos jeux! (He
crouches juggling. Tiny roulette planets fly from his hands.) Les jeux
sont faits! (The planets rush together, uttering crepitant cracks) Rien
va plus! (The planets, buoyant balloons, sail swollen up and away. He
springs off into vacuum.)_

FLORRY: _(Sinking into torpor, crossing herself secretly)_ The end of
the world!

_(A female tepid effluvium leaks out from her. Nebulous obscurity
occupies space. Through the drifting fog without the gramophone blares
over coughs and feetshuffling.)_

THE GRAMOPHONE: Jerusalem!

Open your gates and sing

Hosanna...

_(A rocket rushes up the sky and bursts. A white star fills from it,
proclaiming the consummation of all things and second coming of Elijah.
Along an infinite invisible tightrope taut from zenith to nadir the End
of the World, a twoheaded octopus in gillie's kilts, busby and tartan
filibegs, whirls through the murk, head over heels, in the form of the
Three Legs of Man.)_

THE END OF THE WORLD: _(with a Scotch accent)_ Wha'll dance the keel
row, the keel row, the keel row?

_(Over the possing drift and choking breathcoughs, Elijah's voice, harsh
as a corncrake's, jars on high. Perspiring in a loose lawn surplice with
funnel sleeves he is seen, vergerfaced, above a rostrum about which the
banner of old glory is draped. He thumps the parapet.)_

ELIJAH: No yapping, if you please, in this booth. Jake Crane, Creole
Sue, Dove Campbell, Abe Kirschner, do your coughing with your mouths
shut. Say, I am operating all this trunk line. Boys, do it now. God's
time is 12.25. Tell mother you'll be there. Rush your order and you play
a slick ace. Join on right here. Book through to eternity junction, the
nonstop run. Just one word more. Are you a god or a doggone clod? If the
second advent came to Coney Island are we ready? Florry Christ, Stephen
Christ, Zoe Christ, Bloom Christ, Kitty Christ, Lynch Christ, it's up to
you to sense that cosmic force. Have we cold feet about the cosmos?
No. Be on the side of the angels. Be a prism. You have that something
within, the higher self. You can rub shoulders with a Jesus, a Gautama,
an Ingersoll. Are you all in this vibration? I say you are. You once
nobble that, congregation, and a buck joyride to heaven becomes a back
number. You got me? It's a lifebrightener, sure. The hottest stuff ever
was. It's the whole pie with jam in. It's just the cutest snappiest line
out. It is immense, supersumptuous. It restores. It vibrates. I know
and I am some vibrator. Joking apart and, getting down to bedrock, A.
J. Christ Dowie and the harmonial philosophy, have you got that? O. K.
Seventyseven west sixtyninth street. Got me? That's it. You call me up
by sunphone any old time. Bumboosers, save your stamps. _(He shouts)_
Now then our glory song. All join heartily in the singing. Encore! _(He
sings)_ Jeru...

THE GRAMOPHONE: _(Drowning his voice)_ Whorusalaminyourhighhohhhh...
_(The disc rasps gratingly against the needle)_

THE THREE WHORES: _(Covering their ears, squawk)_ Ahhkkk!

ELIJAH: _(In rolledup shirtsleeves, black in the face, shouts at the top
of his voice, his arms uplifted)_ Big Brother up there, Mr President,
you hear what I done just been saying to you. Certainly, I sort of
believe strong in you, Mr President. I certainly am thinking now Miss
Higgins and Miss Ricketts got religion way inside them. Certainly seems
to me I don't never see no wusser scared female than the way you been,
Miss Florry, just now as I done seed you. Mr President, you come long
and help me save our sisters dear. _(He winks at his audience)_ Our Mr
President, he twig the whole lot and he aint saying nothing.

KITTY-KATE: I forgot myself. In a weak moment I erred and did what I did
on Constitution hill. I was confirmed by the bishop and enrolled in
the brown scapular. My mother's sister married a Montmorency. It was a
working plumber was my ruination when I was pure.

ZOE-FANNY: I let him larrup it into me for the fun of it.

FLORRY-TERESA: It was in consequence of a portwine beverage on top of
Hennessy's three star. I was guilty with Whelan when he slipped into the
bed.

STEPHEN: In the beginning was the word, in the end the world without
end. Blessed be the eight beatitudes.

_(The beatitudes, Dixon, Madden, Crotthers, Costello, Lenehan, Bannon,
Mulligan and Lynch in white surgical students' gowns, four abreast,
goosestepping, tramp fist past in noisy marching)_

THE BEATITUDES: _(Incoherently)_ Beer beef battledog buybull businum
barnum buggerum bishop.

LYSTER: _(In quakergrey kneebreeches and broadbrimmed hat, says
discreetly)_ He is our friend. I need not mention names. Seek thou the
light.

_(He corantos by. Best enters in hairdresser's attire, shinily
laundered, his locks in curlpapers. He leads John Eglinton who wears a
mandarin's kimono of Nankeen yellow, lizardlettered, and a high pagoda
hat.)_

BEST: _(Smiling, lifts the hat and displays a shaven poll from the crown
of which bristles a pigtail toupee tied with an orange topknot)_ I was
just beautifying him, don't you know. A thing of beauty, don't you know,
Yeats says, or I mean, Keats says.

JOHN EGLINTON: _(Produces a greencapped dark lantern and flashes it
towards a corner: with carping accent)_ Esthetics and cosmetics are for
the boudoir. I am out for truth. Plain truth for a plain man. Tanderagee
wants the facts and means to get them.

_(In the cone of the searchlight behind the coalscuttle, ollave,
holyeyed, the bearded figure of Mananaun Maclir broods, chin on knees.
He rises slowly. A cold seawind blows from his druid mouth. About his
head writhe eels and elvers. He is encrusted with weeds and shells. His
right hand holds a bicycle pump. His left hand grasps a huge crayfish by
its two talons.)_

MANANAUN MACLIR: _(With a voice of waves)_ Aum! Hek! Wal! Ak! Lub! Mor!
Ma! White yoghin of the gods. Occult pimander of Hermes Trismegistos.
_(With a voice of whistling seawind)_ Punarjanam patsypunjaub! I won't
have my leg pulled. It has been said by one: beware the left, the cult
of Shakti. _(With a cry of stormbirds)_ Shakti Shiva, darkhidden Father!
_(He smites with his bicycle pump the crayfish in his left hand. On its
cooperative dial glow the twelve signs of the zodiac. He wails with
the vehemence of the ocean.)_ Aum! Baum! Pyjaum! I am the light of the
homestead! I am the dreamery creamery butter.

_(A skeleton judashand strangles the light. The green light wanes to
mauve. The gasjet wails whistling.)_

THE GASJET: Pooah! Pfuiiiiiii!

_(Zoe runs to the chandelier and, crooking her leg, adjusts the
mantle.)_

ZOE: Who has a fag as I'm here?

LYNCH: _(Tossing a cigarette on to the table)_ Here.

ZOE: _(Her head perched aside in mock pride)_ Is that the way to hand
the _pot_ to a lady? _(She stretches up to light the cigarette over the
flame, twirling it slowly, showing the brown tufts of her armpits. Lynch
with his poker lifts boldly a side of her slip. Bare from her garters up
her flesh appears under the sapphire a nixie's green. She puffs calmly
at her cigarette.)_ Can you see the beautyspot of my behind?

LYNCH: I'm not looking

ZOE: _(Makes sheep's eyes)_ No? You wouldn't do a less thing. Would you
suck a lemon?

_(Squinting in mock shame she glances with sidelong meaning at Bloom,
then twists round towards him, pulling her slip free of the poker. Blue
fluid again flows over her flesh. Bloom stands, smiling desirously,
twirling his thumbs. Kitty Ricketts licks her middle finger with her
spittle and, gazing in the mirror, smooths both eyebrows. Lipoti Virag,
basilicogrammate, chutes rapidly down through the chimneyflue and struts
two steps to the left on gawky pink stilts. He is sausaged into several
overcoats and wears a brown macintosh under which he holds a roll of
parchment. In his left eye flashes the monocle of Cashel Boyle O'connor
Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell. On his head is perched an Egyptian pshent.
Two quills project over his ears.)_

VIRAG: _(Heels together, bows)_ My name is Virag Lipoti, of Szombathely.
_(He coughs thoughtfully, drily)_ Promiscuous nakedness is much in
evidence hereabouts, eh? Inadvertently her backview revealed the fact
that she is not wearing those rather intimate garments of which you
are a particular devotee. The injection mark on the thigh I hope you
perceived? Good.

BLOOM: Granpapachi. But...

VIRAG: Number two on the other hand, she of the cherry rouge and
coiffeuse white, whose hair owes not a little to our tribal elixir of
gopherwood, is in walking costume and tightly staysed by her sit, I
should opine. Backbone in front, so to say. Correct me but I always
understood that the act so performed by skittish humans with glimpses of
lingerie appealed to you in virtue of its exhibitionististicicity. In a
word. Hippogriff. Am I right?

BLOOM: She is rather lean.

VIRAG: _(Not unpleasantly)_ Absolutely! Well observed and those pannier
pockets of the skirt and slightly pegtop effect are devised to suggest
bunchiness of hip. A new purchase at some monster sale for which a gull
has been mulcted. Meretricious finery to deceive the eye. Observe the
attention to details of dustspecks. Never put on you tomorrow what you
can wear today. Parallax! _(With a nervous twitch of his head)_ Did you
hear my brain go snap? Pollysyllabax!

BLOOM: _(An elbow resting in a hand, a forefinger against his cheek)_
She seems sad.

VIRAG: _(Cynically, his weasel teeth bared yellow, draws down his left
eye with a finger and barks hoarsely)_ Hoax! Beware of the flapper
and bogus mournful. Lily of the alley. All possess bachelor's button
discovered by Rualdus Columbus. Tumble her. Columble her. Chameleon.
_(More genially)_ Well then, permit me to draw your attention to item
number three. There is plenty of her visible to the naked eye. Observe
the mass of oxygenated vegetable matter on her skull. What ho, she
bumps! The ugly duckling of the party, longcasted and deep in keel.

BLOOM: _(Regretfully)_ When you come out without your gun.

VIRAG: We can do you all brands, mild, medium and strong. Pay your
money, take your choice. How happy could you be with either...

BLOOM: With...?

VIRAG: _(His tongue upcurling)_ Lyum! Look. Her beam is broad. She
is coated with quite a considerable layer of fat. Obviously mammal in
weight of bosom you remark that she has in front well to the fore two
protuberances of very respectable dimensions, inclined to fall in the
noonday soupplate, while on her rere lower down are two additional
protuberances, suggestive of potent rectum and tumescent for palpation,
which leave nothing to be desired save compactness. Such fleshy parts
are the product of careful nurture. When coopfattened their livers
reach an elephantine size. Pellets of new bread with fennygreek and
gumbenjamin swamped down by potions of green tea endow them during their
brief existence with natural pincushions of quite colossal blubber. That
suits your book, eh? Fleshhotpots of Egypt to hanker after. Wallow in
it. Lycopodium. _(His throat twitches)_ Slapbang! There he goes again.

BLOOM: The stye I dislike.

VIRAG: _(Arches his eyebrows)_ Contact with a goldring, they say.
_Argumentum ad feminam_, as we said in old Rome and ancient Greece
in the consulship of Diplodocus and Ichthyosauros. For the rest Eve's
sovereign remedy. Not for sale. Hire only. Huguenot. _(He twitches)_ It
is a funny sound. _(He coughs encouragingly)_ But possibly it is only a
wart. I presume you shall have remembered what I will have taught you on
that head? Wheatenmeal with honey and nutmeg.

BLOOM: _(Reflecting)_ Wheatenmeal with lycopodium and syllabax. This
searching ordeal. It has been an unusually fatiguing day, a chapter of
accidents. Wait. I mean, wartsblood spreads warts, you said...

VIRAG: _(Severely, his nose hardhumped, his side eye winking)_ Stop
twirling your thumbs and have a good old thunk. See, you have forgotten.
Exercise your mnemotechnic. _La causa Ã¨ santa_. Tara. Tara. _(Aside)_ He
will surely remember.

BLOOM: Rosemary also did I understand you to say or willpower over
parasitic tissues. Then nay no I have an inkling. The touch of a
deadhand cures. Mnemo?

VIRAG: _(Excitedly)_ I say so. I say so. E'en so. Technic. _(He taps his
parchmentroll energetically)_ This book tells you how to act with all
descriptive particulars. Consult index for agitated fear of aconite,
melancholy of muriatic, priapic pulsatilla. Virag is going to talk about
amputation. Our old friend caustic. They must be starved. Snip off with
horsehair under the denned neck. But, to change the venue to the Bulgar
and the Basque, have you made up your mind whether you like or dislike
women in male habiliments? _(With a dry snigger)_ You intended to devote
an entire year to the study of the religious problem and the summer
months of 1886 to square the circle and win that million. Pomegranate!
From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step. Pyjamas, let us say?
Or stockingette gussetted knickers, closed? Or, put we the case,
those complicated combinations, camiknickers? _(He crows derisively)_
Keekeereekee!

_(Bloom surveys uncertainly the three whores then gazes at the veiled
mauve light, hearing the everflying moth.)_

BLOOM: I wanted then to have now concluded. Nightdress was never. Hence
this. But tomorrow is a new day will be. Past was is today. What now is
will then morrow as now was be past yester.

VIRAG: _(Prompts in a pig's whisper)_ Insects of the day spend their
brief existence in reiterated coition, lured by the smell of the
inferiorly pulchritudinous fumale possessing extendified pudendal nerve
in dorsal region. Pretty Poll! _(His yellow parrotbeak gabbles nasally)_
They had a proverb in the Carpathians in or about the year five thousand
five hundred and fifty of our era. One tablespoonful of honey will
attract friend Bruin more than half a dozen barrels of first choice malt
vinegar. Bear's buzz bothers bees. But of this apart. At another time
we may resume. We were very pleased, we others. _(He coughs and, bending
his brow, rubs his nose thoughtfully with a scooping hand)_ You shall
find that these night insects follow the light. An illusion for remember
their complex unadjustable eye. For all these knotty points see the
seventeenth book of my Fundamentals of Sexology or the Love Passion
which Doctor L.B. says is the book sensation of the year. Some, to
example, there are again whose movements are automatic. Perceive. That
is his appropriate sun. Nightbird nightsun nighttown. Chase me, Charley!
_(He blows into bloom's ear)_ Buzz!

BLOOM: Bee or bluebottle too other day butting shadow on wall dazed self
then me wandered dazed down shirt good job I...

VIRAG: _(His face impassive, laughs in a rich feminine key)_ Splendid!
Spanish fly in his fly or mustard plaster on his dibble. _(He gobbles
gluttonously with turkey wattles)_ Bubbly jock! Bubbly jock! Where are
we? Open Sesame! Cometh forth! _(He unrolls his parchment rapidly and
reads, his glowworm's nose running backwards over the letters which he
claws)_ Stay, good friend. I bring thee thy answer. Redbank oysters will
shortly be upon us. I'm the best o'cook. Those succulent bivalves may
help us and the truffles of Perigord, tubers dislodged through mister
omnivorous porker, were unsurpassed in cases of nervous debility or
viragitis. Though they stink yet they sting. _(He wags his head with
cackling raillery)_ Jocular. With my eyeglass in my ocular. _(He
sneezes)_ Amen!

BLOOM: _(Absently)_ Ocularly woman's bivalve case is worse. Always open
sesame. The cloven sex. Why they fear vermin, creeping things. Yet Eve
and the serpent contradicts. Not a historical fact. Obvious analogy
to my idea. Serpents too are gluttons for woman's milk. Wind their way
through miles of omnivorous forest to sucksucculent her breast dry. Like
those bubblyjocular Roman matrons one reads of in Elephantuliasis.

VIRAG: _(His mouth projected in hard wrinkles, eyes stonily forlornly
closed, psalms in outlandish monotone)_ That the cows with their those
distended udders that they have been the the known...

BLOOM: I am going to scream. I beg your pardon. Ah? So. _(He repeats)_
Spontaneously to seek out the saurian's lair in order to entrust their
teats to his avid suction. Ant milks aphis. _(Profoundly)_ Instinct
rules the world. In life. In death.

VIRAG: _(Head askew, arches his back and hunched wingshoulders, peers
at the moth out of blear bulged eyes, points a horning claw and cries)_
Who's moth moth? Who's dear Gerald? Dear Ger, that you? O dear, he is
Gerald. O, I much fear he shall be most badly burned. Will some pleashe
pershon not now impediment so catastrophics mit agitation of firstclass
tablenumpkin? _(He mews)_ Puss puss puss puss! _(He sighs, draws back
and stares sideways down with dropping underjaw)_ Well, well. He doth
rest anon. (He snaps his jaws suddenly on the air)

THE MOTH:

     I'm a tiny tiny thing
     Ever flying in the spring
     Round and round a ringaring.
     Long ago I was a king
     Now I do this kind of thing
     On the wing, on the wing!
     Bing!

_(He rushes against the mauve shade, flapping noisily)_ Pretty pretty
pretty pretty pretty pretty petticoats.

_(From left upper entrance with two gliding steps Henry Flower comes
forward to left front centre. He wears a dark mantle and drooping plumed
sombrero. He carries a silverstringed inlaid dulcimer and a longstemmed
bamboo Jacob's pipe, its clay bowl fashioned as a female head. He wears
dark velvet hose and silverbuckled pumps. He has the romantic Saviour's
face with flowing locks, thin beard and moustache. His spindlelegs and
sparrow feet are those of the tenor Mario, prince of Candia. He settles
down his goffered ruffs and moistens his lips with a passage of his
amorous tongue.)_

HENRY: _(In a low dulcet voice, touching the strings of his guitar)_
There is a flower that bloometh.

_(Virag truculent, his jowl set, stares at the lamp. Grave Bloom regards
Zoe's neck. Henry gallant turns with pendant dewlap to the piano.)_

STEPHEN: _(To himself)_ Play with your eyes shut. Imitate pa. Filling my
belly with husks of swine. Too much of this. I will arise and go to my.
Expect this is the. Steve, thou art in a parlous way. Must visit old
Deasy or telegraph. Our interview of this morning has left on me a deep
impression. Though our ages. Will write fully tomorrow. I'm partially
drunk, by the way. _(He touches the keys again)_ Minor chord comes now.
Yes. Not much however.

_(Almidano Artifoni holds out a batonroll of music with vigorous
moustachework.)_

ARTIFONI: _Ci rifletta. Lei rovina tutto._

FLORRY: Sing us something. Love's old sweet song.

STEPHEN: No voice. I am a most finished artist. Lynch, did I show you
the letter about the lute?

FLORRY: _(Smirking)_ The bird that can sing and won't sing.

_(The Siamese twins, Philip Drunk and Philip Sober, two Oxford dons with
lawnmowers, appear in the window embrasure. Both are masked with Matthew
Arnold's face.)_

PHILIP SOBER: Take a fool's advice. All is not well. Work it out with
the buttend of a pencil, like a good young idiot. Three pounds twelve
you got, two notes, one sovereign, two crowns, if youth but knew.
Mooney's en ville, Mooney's sur mer, the Moira, Larchet's, Holles street
hospital, Burke's. Eh? I am watching you.

PHILIP DRUNK: _(Impatiently)_ Ah, bosh, man. Go to hell! I paid my way.
If I could only find out about octaves. Reduplication of personality.
Who was it told me his name? _(His lawnmower begins to purr)_ Aha, yes.
_Zoe mou sas agapo_. Have a notion I was here before. When was it not
Atkinson his card I have somewhere. Mac Somebody. Unmack I have it. He
told me about, hold on, Swinburne, was it, no?

FLORRY: And the song?

STEPHEN: Spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.

FLORRY: Are you out of Maynooth? You're like someone I knew once.

STEPHEN: Out of it now. _(To himself)_ Clever.

PHILIP DRUNK AND PHILIP SOBER: _(Their lawnmowers purring with a
rigadoon of grasshalms)_ Clever ever. Out of it out of it. By the
bye have you the book, the thing, the ashplant? Yes, there it, yes.
Cleverever outofitnow. Keep in condition. Do like us.

ZOE: There was a priest down here two nights ago to do his bit of
business with his coat buttoned up. You needn't try to hide, I says to
him. I know you've a Roman collar.

VIRAG: Perfectly logical from his standpoint. Fall of man. _(Harshly,
his pupils waxing)_ To hell with the pope! Nothing new under the sun. I
am the Virag who disclosed the Sex Secrets of Monks and Maidens. Why
I left the church of Rome. Read the Priest, the Woman and the
Confessional. Penrose. Flipperty Jippert. _(He wriggles)_ Woman, undoing
with sweet pudor her belt of rushrope, offers her allmoist yoni to man's
lingam. Short time after man presents woman with pieces of jungle meat.
Woman shows joy and covers herself with featherskins. Man loves her yoni
fiercely with big lingam, the stiff one. _(He cries) Coactus volui._
Then giddy woman will run about. Strong man grapses woman's wrist.
Woman squeals, bites, spucks. Man, now fierce angry, strikes woman's fat
yadgana. _(He chases his tail)_ Piffpaff! Popo! _(He stops, sneezes)_
Pchp! _(He worries his butt)_ Prrrrrht!

LYNCH: I hope you gave the good father a penance. Nine glorias for
shooting a bishop.

ZOE: _(Spouts walrus smoke through her nostrils)_ He couldn't get a
connection. Only, you know, sensation. A dry rush.

BLOOM: Poor man!

ZOE: _(Lightly)_ Only for what happened him.

BLOOM: How?

VIRAG: _(A diabolic rictus of black luminosity contracting his visage,
cranes his scraggy neck forward. He lifts a mooncalf nozzle and howls.)
Verfluchte Goim!_ He had a father, forty fathers. He never existed. Pig
God! He had two left feet. He was Judas Iacchia, a Libyan eunuch, the
pope's bastard. _(He leans out on tortured forepaws, elbows bent rigid,
his eye agonising in his flat skullneck and yelps over the mute world)_
A son of a whore. Apocalypse.

KITTY: And Mary Shortall that was in the lock with the pox she got from
Jimmy Pidgeon in the blue caps had a child off him that couldn't swallow
and was smothered with the convulsions in the mattress and we all
subscribed for the funeral.

PHILIP DRUNK: _(Gravely) Qui vous a mis dans cette fichue position,
Philippe?_

PHILIP SOBER: _(Gaily) c'Ã©tait le sacrÃ© pigeon, Philippe._

_(Kitty unpins her hat and sets it down calmly, patting her henna hair.
And a prettier, a daintier head of winsome curls was never seen on a
whore's shoulders. Lynch puts on her hat. She whips it off.)_

LYNCH: _(Laughs)_ And to such delights has Metchnikoff inoculated
anthropoid apes.

FLORRY: _(Nods)_ Locomotor ataxy.

ZOE: _(Gaily)_ O, my dictionary.

LYNCH: Three wise virgins.

VIRAG: _(Agueshaken, profuse yellow spawn foaming over his bony
epileptic lips)_ She sold lovephiltres, whitewax, orangeflower. Panther,
the Roman centurion, polluted her with his genitories. _(He sticks out
a flickering phosphorescent scorpion tongue, his hand on his fork)_
Messiah! He burst her tympanum. _(With gibbering baboon's cries he jerks
his hips in the cynical spasm)_ Hik! Hek! Hak! Hok! Huk! Kok! Kuk!

_(Ben Jumbo Dollard, Rubicund, musclebound, hairynostrilled,
hugebearded, cabbageeared, shaggychested, shockmaned, fat-papped, stands
forth, his loins and genitals tightened into a pair of black bathing
bagslops.)_

BEN DOLLARD: _(Nakkering castanet bones in his huge padded paws, yodels
jovially in base barreltone)_ When love absorbs my ardent soul.

_(The virgins Nurse Callan and Nurse Quigley burst through the
ringkeepers and the ropes and mob him with open arms.)_

THE VIRGINS: _(Gushingly)_ Big Ben! Ben my Chree!

A VOICE: Hold that fellow with the bad breeches.

BEN DOLLARD: _(Smites his thigh in abundant laughter)_ Hold him now.

HENRY: _(Caressing on his breast a severed female head, murmurs)_ Thine
heart, mine love. _(He plucks his lutestrings)_ When first I saw...

VIRAG: _(Sloughing his skins, his multitudinous plumage moulting)_ Rats!
_(He yawns, showing a coalblack throat, and closes his jaws by an upward
push of his parchmentroll)_ After having said which I took my departure.
Farewell. Fare thee well. _Dreck!_

_(Henry Flower combs his moustache and beard rapidly with a pocketcomb
and gives a cow's lick to his hair. Steered by his rapier, he glides to
the door, his wild harp slung behind him. Virag reaches the door in two
ungainly stilthops, his tail cocked, and deftly claps sideways on the
wall a pusyellow flybill, butting it with his head.)_

THE FLYBILL: K. II. Post No Bills. Strictly confidential. Dr Hy Franks.

HENRY: All is lost now.

_(Virag unscrews his head in a trice and holds it under his arm.)_

VIRAG'S HEAD: Quack!

_(Exeunt severally.)_

STEPHEN: _(Over his shoulder to zoe)_ You would have preferred
the fighting parson who founded the protestant error. But beware
Antisthenes, the dog sage, and the last end of Arius Heresiarchus. The
agony in the closet.

LYNCH: All one and the same God to her.

STEPHEN: _(Devoutly)_ And sovereign Lord of all things.

FLORRY: _(To Stephen)_ I'm sure you're a spoiled priest. Or a monk.

LYNCH: He is. A cardinal's son.

STEPHEN: Cardinal sin. Monks of the screw.

_(His Eminence Simon Stephen Cardinal Dedalus, Primate of all Ireland,
appears in the doorway, dressed in red soutane, sandals and socks. Seven
dwarf simian acolytes, also in red, cardinal sins, uphold his train,
peeping under it. He wears a battered silk hat sideways on his head. His
thumbs are stuck in his armpits and his palms outspread. Round his
neck hangs a rosary of corks ending on his breast in a corkscrew cross.
Releasing his thumbs, he invokes grace from on high with large wave
gestures and proclaims with bloated pomp:)_

THE CARDINAL:

     Conservio lies captured
     He lies in the lowest dungeon
     With manacles and chains around his limbs
     Weighing upwards of three tons.

_(He looks at all for a moment, his right eye closed tight, his left
cheek puffed out. Then, unable to repress his merriment, he rocks to and
fro, arms akimbo, and sings with broad rollicking humour:)_

     O, the poor little fellow
     Hihihihihis legs they were yellow
     He was plump, fat and heavy and brisk as a snake
     But some bloody savage
     To graize his white cabbage
     He murdered Nell Flaherty's duckloving drake.

_(A multitude of midges swarms white over his robe. He scratches himself
with crossed arms at his ribs, grimacing, and exclaims:)_

I'm suffering the agony of the damned. By the hoky fiddle, thanks be to
Jesus those funny little chaps are not unanimous. If they were they'd
walk me off the face of the bloody globe.

_(His head aslant he blesses curtly with fore and middle fingers,
imparts the Easter kiss and doubleshuffles off comically, swaying
his hat from side to side, shrinking quickly to the size of his
trainbearers. The dwarf acolytes, giggling, peeping, nudging, ogling,
Easterkissing, zigzag behind him. His voice is heard mellow from afar,
merciful male, melodious:)_

     Shall carry my heart to thee,
     Shall carry my heart to thee,
     And the breath of the balmy night
     Shall carry my heart to thee!
     _(The trick doorhandle turns.)_


THE DOORHANDLE: Theeee!

ZOE: The devil is in that door.

_(A male form passes down the creaking staircase and is heard taking
the waterproof and hat from the rack. Bloom starts forward involuntarily
and, half closing the door as he passes, takes the chocolate from his
pocket and offers it nervously to Zoe.)_

ZOE: _(Sniffs his hair briskly)_ Hmmm! Thank your mother for the
rabbits. I'm very fond of what I like.

BLOOM: _(Hearing a male voice in talk with the whores on the doorstep,
pricks his ears)_ If it were he? After? Or because not? Or the double
event?

ZOE: _(Tears open the silverfoil)_ Fingers was made before forks. _(She
breaks off and nibbles a piece gives a piece to Kitty Ricketts and then
turns kittenishly to Lynch)_ No objection to French lozenges? _(He nods.
She taunts him.)_ Have it now or wait till you get it? _(He opens his
mouth, his head cocked. She whirls the prize in left circle. His head
follows. She whirls it back in right circle. He eyes her.)_ Catch!

_(She tosses a piece. With an adroit snap he catches it and bites it
through with a crack.)_

KITTY: _(Chewing)_ The engineer I was with at the bazaar does have
lovely ones. Full of the best liqueurs. And the viceroy was there with
his lady. The gas we had on the Toft's hobbyhorses. I'm giddy still.

BLOOM: _(In Svengali's fur overcoat, with folded arms and Napoleonic
forelock, frowns in ventriloquial exorcism with piercing eagle glance
towards the door. Then rigid with left foot advanced he makes a swift
pass with impelling fingers and gives the sign of past master, drawing
his right arm downwards from his left shoulder.)_ Go, go, go, I conjure
you, whoever you are!

_(A male cough and tread are heard passing through the mist outside.
Bloom's features relax. He places a hand in his waistcoat, posing
calmly. Zoe offers him chocolate.)_

BLOOM: _(Solemnly)_ Thanks.

ZOE: Do as you're bid. Here!

_(A firm heelclacking tread is heard on the stairs.)_

BLOOM: _(Takes the chocolate)_ Aphrodisiac? Tansy and pennyroyal. But I
bought it. Vanilla calms or? Mnemo. Confused light confuses memory. Red
influences lupus. Colours affect women's characters, any they have. This
black makes me sad. Eat and be merry for tomorrow. _(He eats)_ Influence
taste too, mauve. But it is so long since I. Seems new. Aphro. That
priest. Must come. Better late than never. Try truffles at Andrews.

_(The door opens. Bella Cohen, a massive whoremistress, enters. She
is dressed in a threequarter ivory gown, fringed round the hem with
tasselled selvedge, and cools herself flirting a black horn fan like
Minnie Hauck in_ Carmen. _On her left hand are wedding and keeper rings.
Her eyes are deeply carboned. She has a sprouting moustache. Her
olive face is heavy, slightly sweated and fullnosed with orangetainted
nostrils. She has large pendant beryl eardrops.)_

BELLA: My word! I'm all of a mucksweat.

_(She glances round her at the couples. Then her eyes rest on Bloom with
hard insistence. Her large fan winnows wind towards her heated faceneck
and embonpoint. Her falcon eyes glitter.)_

THE FAN: _(Flirting quickly, then slowly)_ Married, I see.

BLOOM: Yes. Partly, I have mislaid...

THE FAN: _(Half opening, then closing)_ And the missus is master.
Petticoat government.

BLOOM: _(Looks down with a sheepish grin)_ That is so.

THE FAN: _(Folding together, rests against her left eardrop)_ Have you
forgotten me?

BLOOM: Yes. Yo.

THE FAN: _(Folded akimbo against her waist)_ Is me her was you dreamed
before? Was then she him you us since knew? Am all them and the same now
we?

_(Bella approaches, gently tapping with the fan.)_

BLOOM: _(Wincing)_ Powerful being. In my eyes read that slumber which
women love.

THE FAN: _(Tapping)_ We have met. You are mine. It is fate.

BLOOM: _(Cowed)_ Exuberant female. Enormously I desiderate your
domination. I am exhausted, abandoned, no more young. I stand, so to
speak, with an unposted letter bearing the extra regulation fee before
the too late box of the general postoffice of human life. The door
and window open at a right angle cause a draught of thirtytwo feet per
second according to the law of falling bodies. I have felt this instant
a twinge of sciatica in my left glutear muscle. It runs in our family.
Poor dear papa, a widower, was a regular barometer from it. He believed
in animal heat. A skin of tabby lined his winter waistcoat. Near the
end, remembering king David and the Sunamite, he shared his bed with
Athos, faithful after death. A dog's spittle as you probably... _(He
winces)_ Ah!

RICHIE GOULDING: _(Bagweighted, passes the door)_ Mocking is catch. Best
value in Dub. Fit for a prince's. Liver and kidney.

THE FAN: _(Tapping)_ All things end. Be mine. Now.

BLOOM: _(Undecided)_ All now? I should not have parted with my talisman.
Rain, exposure at dewfall on the searocks, a peccadillo at my time of
life. Every phenomenon has a natural cause.

THE FAN: _(Points downwards slowly)_ You may.

BLOOM: _(Looks downwards and perceives her unfastened bootlace)_ We are
observed.

THE FAN: _(Points downwards quickly)_ You must.

BLOOM: _(With desire, with reluctance)_ I can make a true black knot.
Learned when I served my time and worked the mail order line for
Kellett's. Experienced hand. Every knot says a lot. Let me. In courtesy.
I knelt once before today. Ah!

_(Bella raises her gown slightly and, steadying her pose, lifts to the
edge of a chair a plump buskined hoof and a full pastern, silksocked.
Bloom, stifflegged, aging, bends over her hoof and with gentle fingers
draws out and in her laces.)_

BLOOM: _(Murmurs lovingly)_ To be a shoefitter in Manfield's was my
love's young dream, the darling joys of sweet buttonhooking, to lace
up crisscrossed to kneelength the dressy kid footwear satinlined, so
incredibly impossibly small, of Clyde Road ladies. Even their wax model
Raymonde I visited daily to admire her cobweb hose and stick of rhubarb
toe, as worn in Paris.

THE HOOF: Smell my hot goathide. Feel my royal weight.

BLOOM: _(Crosslacing)_ Too tight?

THE HOOF: If you bungle, Handy Andy, I'll kick your football for you.

BLOOM: Not to lace the wrong eyelet as I did the night of the bazaar
dance. Bad luck. Hook in wrong tache of her... person you mentioned.
That night she met... Now!

_(He knots the lace. Bella places her foot on the floor. Bloom raises
his head. Her heavy face, her eyes strike him in midbrow. His eyes grow
dull, darker and pouched, his nose thickens.)_

BLOOM: _(Mumbles)_ Awaiting your further orders we remain, gentlemen,...

BELLO: _(With a hard basilisk stare, in a baritone voice)_ Hound of
dishonour!

BLOOM: _(Infatuated)_ Empress!

BELLO: _(His heavy cheekchops sagging)_ Adorer of the adulterous rump!

BLOOM: _(Plaintively)_ Hugeness!

BELLO: Dungdevourer!

BLOOM: _(With sinews semiflexed)_ Magmagnificence!

BELLO: Down! _(He taps her on the shoulder with his fan)_ Incline feet
forward! Slide left foot one pace back! You will fall. You are falling.
On the hands down!

BLOOM: _(Her eyes upturned in the sign of admiration, closing, yaps)_
Truffles!

_(With a piercing epileptic cry she sinks on all fours, grunting,
snuffling, rooting at his feet: then lies, shamming dead, with eyes shut
tight, trembling eyelids, bowed upon the ground in the attitude of most
excellent master.)_

BELLO: _(With bobbed hair, purple gills, fit moustache rings round his
shaven mouth, in mountaineer's puttees, green silverbuttoned coat, sport
skirt and alpine hat with moorcock's feather, his hands stuck deep in
his breeches pockets, places his heel on her neck and grinds it in)_
Footstool! Feel my entire weight. Bow, bondslave, before the throne of
your despot's glorious heels so glistening in their proud erectness.

BLOOM: _(Enthralled, bleats)_ I promise never to disobey.

BELLO: _(Laughs loudly)_ Holy smoke! You little know what's in store for
you. I'm the Tartar to settle your little lot and break you in! I'll bet
Kentucky cocktails all round I shame it out of you, old son. Cheek me,
I dare you. If you do tremble in anticipation of heel discipline to be
inflicted in gym costume.

_(Bloom creeps under the sofa and peers out through the fringe.)_

ZOE: _(Widening her slip to screen her)_ She's not here.

BLOOM: _(Closing her eyes)_ She's not here.

FLORRY: _(Hiding her with her gown)_ She didn't mean it, Mr Bello.
She'll be good, sir.

KITTY: Don't be too hard on her, Mr Bello. Sure you won't, ma'amsir.

BELLO: _(Coaxingly)_ Come, ducky dear, I want a word with you, darling,
just to administer correction. Just a little heart to heart talk,
sweety. _(Bloom puts out her timid head)_ There's a good girly now.
_(Bello grabs her hair violently and drags her forward)_ I only want
to correct you for your own good on a soft safe spot. How's that tender
behind? O, ever so gently, pet. Begin to get ready.

BLOOM: _(Fainting)_ Don't tear my...

BELLO: _(Savagely)_ The nosering, the pliers, the bastinado, the hanging
hook, the knout I'll make you kiss while the flutes play like the Nubian
slave of old. You're in for it this time! I'll make you remember me for
the balance of your natural life. _(His forehead veins swollen, his face
congested)_ I shall sit on your ottoman saddleback every morning after
my thumping good breakfast of Matterson's fat hamrashers and a bottle
of Guinness's porter. _(He belches)_ And suck my thumping good Stock
Exchange cigar while I read the _Licensed Victualler's Gazette_. Very
possibly I shall have you slaughtered and skewered in my stables and
enjoy a slice of you with crisp crackling from the baking tin basted
and baked like sucking pig with rice and lemon or currant sauce. It will
hurt you. _(He twists her arm. Bloom squeals, turning turtle.)_

BLOOM: Don't be cruel, nurse! Don't!

BELLO: _(Twisting)_ Another!

BLOOM: _(Screams)_ O, it's hell itself! Every nerve in my body aches
like mad!

BELLO: _(Shouts)_ Good, by the rumping jumping general! That's the best
bit of news I heard these six weeks. Here, don't keep me waiting, damn
you! _(He slaps her face)_

BLOOM: _(Whimpers)_ You're after hitting me. I'll tell...

BELLO: Hold him down, girls, till I squat on him.

ZOE: Yes. Walk on him! I will.

FLORRY: I will. Don't be greedy.

KITTY: No, me. Lend him to me.

_(The brothel cook, mrs keogh, wrinkled, greybearded, in a greasy bib,
men's grey and green socks and brogues, floursmeared, a rollingpin stuck
with raw pastry in her bare red arm and hand, appears at the door.)_

MRS KEOGH: _(Ferociously)_ Can I help? _(They hold and pinion Bloom.)_

BELLO: _(Squats with a grunt on Bloom's upturned face, puffing
cigarsmoke, nursing a fat leg)_ I see Keating Clay is elected
vicechairman of the Richmond asylum and by the by Guinness's preference
shares are at sixteen three quaffers. Curse me for a fool that didn't
buy that lot Craig and Gardner told me about. Just my infernal luck,
curse it. And that Goddamned outsider _Throwaway_ at twenty to one.
_(He quenches his cigar angrily on Bloom's ear)_ Where's that Goddamned
cursed ashtray?

BLOOM: _(Goaded, buttocksmothered)_ O! O! Monsters! Cruel one!

BELLO: Ask for that every ten minutes. Beg. Pray for it as you never
prayed before. _(He thrusts out a figged fist and foul cigar)_ Here,
kiss that. Both. Kiss. _(He throws a leg astride and, pressing with
horseman's knees, calls in a hard voice)_ Gee up! A cockhorse to Banbury
cross. I'll ride him for the Eclipse stakes. _(He bends sideways and
squeezes his mount's testicles roughly, shouting)_ Ho! Off we pop! I'll
nurse you in proper fashion. _(He horserides cockhorse, leaping in the
saddle)_ The lady goes a pace a pace and the coachman goes a trot a trot
and the gentleman goes a gallop a gallop a gallop a gallop.

FLORRY: _(Pulls at Bello)_ Let me on him now. You had enough. I asked
before you.

ZOE: _(Pulling at florry)_ Me. Me. Are you not finished with him yet,
suckeress?

BLOOM: _(Stifling)_ Can't.

BELLO: Well, I'm not. Wait. _(He holds in his breath)_ Curse it. Here.
This bung's about burst. _(He uncorks himself behind: then, contorting
his features, farts loudly)_ Take that! _(He recorks himself)_ Yes, by
Jingo, sixteen three quarters.

BLOOM: _(A sweat breaking out over him)_ Not man. _(He sniffs)_ Woman.

BELLO: _(Stands up)_ No more blow hot and cold. What you longed for has
come to pass. Henceforth you are unmanned and mine in earnest, a thing
under the yoke. Now for your punishment frock. You will shed your male
garments, you understand, Ruby Cohen? and don the shot silk luxuriously
rustling over head and shoulders. And quickly too!

BLOOM: _(Shrinks)_ Silk, mistress said! O crinkly! scrapy! Must I
tiptouch it with my nails?

BELLO: _(Points to his whores)_ As they are now so will you be, wigged,
singed, perfumesprayed, ricepowdered, with smoothshaven armpits. Tape
measurements will be taken next your skin. You will be laced with cruel
force into vicelike corsets of soft dove coutille with whalebone busk to
the diamondtrimmed pelvis, the absolute outside edge, while your figure,
plumper than when at large, will be restrained in nettight frocks,
pretty two ounce petticoats and fringes and things stamped, of course,
with my houseflag, creations of lovely lingerie for Alice and nice
scent for Alice. Alice will feel the pullpull. Martha and Mary will be
a little chilly at first in such delicate thighcasing but the frilly
flimsiness of lace round your bare knees will remind you...

BLOOM: _(A charming soubrette with dauby cheeks, mustard hair and large
male hands and nose, leering mouth)_ I tried her things on only twice,
a small prank, in Holles street. When we were hard up I washed them to
save the laundry bill. My own shirts I turned. It was the purest thrift.

BELLO: _(Jeers)_ Little jobs that make mother pleased, eh? And showed
off coquettishly in your domino at the mirror behind closedrawn blinds
your unskirted thighs and hegoat's udders in various poses of surrender,
eh? Ho! ho! I have to laugh! That secondhand black operatop shift and
short trunkleg naughties all split up the stitches at her last rape that
Mrs Miriam Dandrade sold you from the Shelbourne hotel, eh?

BLOOM: Miriam. Black. Demimondaine.

BELLO: _(Guffaws)_ Christ Almighty it's too tickling, this! You were
a nicelooking Miriam when you clipped off your backgate hairs and
lay swooning in the thing across the bed as Mrs Dandrade about to be
violated by lieutenant Smythe-Smythe, Mr Philip Augustus Blockwell M.
P., signor Laci Daremo, the robust tenor, blueeyed Bert, the liftboy,
Henri Fleury of Gordon Bennett fame, Sheridan, the quadroon Croesus, the
varsity wetbob eight from old Trinity, Ponto, her splendid Newfoundland
and Bobs, dowager duchess of Manorhamilton. _(He guffaws again)_ Christ,
wouldn't it make a Siamese cat laugh?

BLOOM: _(Her hands and features working)_ It was Gerald converted me to
be a true corsetlover when I was female impersonator in the High School
play _Vice Versa_. It was dear Gerald. He got that kink, fascinated by
sister's stays. Now dearest Gerald uses pinky greasepaint and gilds his
eyelids. Cult of the beautiful.

BELLO: _(With wicked glee)_ Beautiful! Give us a breather! When you
took your seat with womanish care, lifting your billowy flounces, on the
smoothworn throne.

BLOOM: Science. To compare the various joys we each enjoy. _(Earnestly)_
And really it's better the position... because often I used to wet...

BELLO: _(Sternly)_ No insubordination! The sawdust is there in the
corner for you. I gave you strict instructions, didn't I? Do it
standing, sir! I'll teach you to behave like a jinkleman! If I catch a
trace on your swaddles. Aha! By the ass of the Dorans you'll find I'm a
martinet. The sins of your past are rising against you. Many. Hundreds.

THE SINS OF THE PAST: _(In a medley of voices)_ He went through a form
of clandestine marriage with at least one woman in the shadow of the
Black church. Unspeakable messages he telephoned mentally to Miss Dunn
at an address in D'Olier street while he presented himself indecently to
the instrument in the callbox. By word and deed he frankly encouraged
a nocturnal strumpet to deposit fecal and other matter in an unsanitary
outhouse attached to empty premises. In five public conveniences
he wrote pencilled messages offering his nuptial partner to all
strongmembered males. And by the offensively smelling vitriol works did
he not pass night after night by loving courting couples to see if and
what and how much he could see? Did he not lie in bed, the gross boar,
gloating over a nauseous fragment of wellused toilet paper presented to
him by a nasty harlot, stimulated by gingerbread and a postal order?

BELLO: _(Whistles loudly)_ Say! What was the most revolting piece of
obscenity in all your career of crime? Go the whole hog. Puke it out! Be
candid for once.

_(Mute inhuman faces throng forward, leering, vanishing, gibbering,
Booloohoom. Poldy Kock, Bootlaces a penny Cassidy's hag, blind
stripling, Larry Rhinoceros, the girl, the woman, the whore, the other,
the...)_

BLOOM: Don't ask me! Our mutual faith. Pleasants street. I only thought
the half of the... I swear on my sacred oath...

BELLO: _(Peremptorily)_ Answer. Repugnant wretch! I insist on knowing.
Tell me something to amuse me, smut or a bloody good ghoststory or a
line of poetry, quick, quick, quick! Where? How? What time? With how
many? I give you just three seconds. One! Two! Thr...

BLOOM: _(Docile, gurgles)_ I rererepugnosed in rerererepugnant

BELLO: _(Imperiously)_ O, get out, you skunk! Hold your tongue! Speak
when you're spoken to.

BLOOM: _(Bows)_ Master! Mistress! Mantamer!

_(He lifts his arms. His bangle bracelets fill.)_

BELLO: _(Satirically)_ By day you will souse and bat our smelling
underclothes also when we ladies are unwell, and swab out our latrines
with dress pinned up and a dishclout tied to your tail. Won't that be
nice? _(He places a ruby ring on her finger)_ And there now! With this
ring I thee own. Say, thank you, mistress.

BLOOM: Thank you, mistress.

BELLO: You will make the beds, get my tub ready, empty the pisspots in
the different rooms, including old Mrs Keogh's the cook's, a sandy one.
Ay, and rinse the seven of them well, mind, or lap it up like champagne.
Drink me piping hot. Hop! You will dance attendance or I'll lecture you
on your misdeeds, Miss Ruby, and spank your bare bot right well, miss,
with the hairbrush. You'll be taught the error of your ways. At night
your wellcreamed braceletted hands will wear fortythreebutton gloves
newpowdered with talc and having delicately scented fingertips. For such
favours knights of old laid down their lives. _(He chuckles)_ My boys
will be no end charmed to see you so ladylike, the colonel, above
all, when they come here the night before the wedding to fondle my new
attraction in gilded heels. First I'll have a go at you myself. A man I
know on the turf named Charles Alberta Marsh (I was in bed with him just
now and another gentleman out of the Hanaper and Petty Bag office) is
on the lookout for a maid of all work at a short knock. Swell the bust.
Smile. Droop shoulders. What offers? _(He points)_ For that lot. Trained
by owner to fetch and carry, basket in mouth. _(He bares his arm and
plunges it elbowdeep in Bloom's vulva)_ There's fine depth for you!
What, boys? That give you a hardon? _(He shoves his arm in a bidder's
face)_ Here wet the deck and wipe it round!

A BIDDER: A florin.

_(Dillon's lacquey rings his handbell.)_

THE LACQUEY: Barang!

A VOICE: One and eightpence too much.

CHARLES ALBERTA MARSH: Must be virgin. Good breath. Clean.

BELLO: _(Gives a rap with his gavel)_ Two bar. Rockbottom figure and
cheap at the price. Fourteen hands high. Touch and examine his points.
Handle him. This downy skin, these soft muscles, this tender flesh. If
I had only my gold piercer here! And quite easy to milk. Three newlaid
gallons a day. A pure stockgetter, due to lay within the hour. His
sire's milk record was a thousand gallons of whole milk in forty weeks.
Whoa my jewel! Beg up! Whoa! _(He brands his initial C on Bloom's
croup)_ So! Warranted Cohen! What advance on two bob, gentlemen?

A DARKVISAGED MAN: _(In disguised accent)_ Hoondert punt sterlink.

VOICES: _(Subdued)_ For the Caliph. Haroun Al Raschid.

BELLO: _(Gaily)_ Right. Let them all come. The scanty, daringly short
skirt, riding up at the knee to show a peep of white pantalette, is a
potent weapon and transparent stockings, emeraldgartered, with the
long straight seam trailing up beyond the knee, appeal to the better
instincts of the _blasÃ©_ man about town. Learn the smooth mincing walk
on four inch Louis Quinze heels, the Grecian bend with provoking croup,
the thighs fluescent, knees modestly kissing. Bring all your powers of
fascination to bear on them. Pander to their Gomorrahan vices.

BLOOM: _(Bends his blushing face into his armpit and simpers with
forefinger in mouth)_ O, I know what you're hinting at now!

BELLO: What else are you good for, an impotent thing like you? _(He
stoops and, peering, pokes with his fan rudely under the fat suet folds
of Bloom's haunches)_ Up! Up! Manx cat! What have we here? Where's your
curly teapot gone to or who docked it on you, cockyolly? Sing, birdy,
sing. It's as limp as a boy of six's doing his pooly behind a cart. Buy
a bucket or sell your pump. _(Loudly)_ Can you do a man's job?

BLOOM: Eccles street...

BELLO: _(Sarcastically)_ I wouldn't hurt your feelings for the world but
there's a man of brawn in possession there. The tables are turned, my
gay young fellow! He is something like a fullgrown outdoor man. Well for
you, you muff, if you had that weapon with knobs and lumps and warts all
over it. He shot his bolt, I can tell you! Foot to foot, knee to knee,
belly to belly, bubs to breast! He's no eunuch. A shock of red hair he
has sticking out of him behind like a furzebush! Wait for nine months,
my lad! Holy ginger, it's kicking and coughing up and down in her guts
already! That makes you wild, don't it? Touches the spot? _(He spits in
contempt)_ Spittoon!

BLOOM: I was indecently treated, I... Inform the police. Hundred
pounds. Unmentionable. I...

BELLO: Would if you could, lame duck. A downpour we want not your
drizzle.

BLOOM: To drive me mad! Moll! I forgot! Forgive! Moll... We... Still...

BELLO: _(Ruthlessly)_ No, Leopold Bloom, all is changed by woman's will
since you slept horizontal in Sleepy Hollow your night of twenty years.
Return and see.

_(Old Sleepy Hollow calls over the wold.)_

SLEEPY HOLLOW: Rip van Wink! Rip van Winkle!

BLOOM: _(In tattered mocassins with a rusty fowlingpiece, tiptoeing,
fingertipping, his haggard bony bearded face peering through the diamond
panes, cries out)_ I see her! It's she! The first night at Mat Dillon's!
But that dress, the green! And her hair is dyed gold and he...

BELLO: _(Laughs mockingly)_ That's your daughter, you owl, with a
Mullingar student.

_(Milly Bloom, fairhaired, greenvested, slimsandalled, her blue scarf
in the seawind simply swirling, breaks from the arms of her lover and
calls, her young eyes wonderwide.)_

MILLY: My! It's Papli! But, O Papli, how old you've grown!

BELLO: Changed, eh? Our whatnot, our writingtable where we never wrote,
aunt Hegarty's armchair, our classic reprints of old masters. A man and
his menfriends are living there in clover. The _Cuckoos' Rest!_ Why not?
How many women had you, eh, following them up dark streets, flatfoot,
exciting them by your smothered grunts, what, you male prostitute?
Blameless dames with parcels of groceries. Turn about. Sauce for the
goose, my gander O.

BLOOM: They... I...

BELLO: _(Cuttingly)_ Their heelmarks will stamp the Brusselette carpet
you bought at Wren's auction. In their horseplay with Moll the romp to
find the buck flea in her breeches they will deface the little statue
you carried home in the rain for art for art' sake. They will violate
the secrets of your bottom drawer. Pages will be torn from your handbook
of astronomy to make them pipespills. And they will spit in your ten
shilling brass fender from Hampton Leedom's.

BLOOM: Ten and six. The act of low scoundrels. Let me go. I will return.
I will prove...

A VOICE: Swear!

_(Bloom clenches his fists and crawls forward, a bowieknife between his
teeth.)_

BELLO: As a paying guest or a kept man? Too late. You have made your
secondbest bed and others must lie in it. Your epitaph is written. You
are down and out and don't you forget it, old bean.

BLOOM: Justice! All Ireland versus one! Has nobody...? _(He bites his
thumb)_

BELLO: Die and be damned to you if you have any sense of decency
or grace about you. I can give you a rare old wine that'll send you
skipping to hell and back. Sign a will and leave us any coin you have!
If you have none see you damn well get it, steal it, rob it! We'll bury
you in our shrubbery jakes where you'll be dead and dirty with old Cuck
Cohen, my stepnephew I married, the bloody old gouty procurator and
sodomite with a crick in his neck, and my other ten or eleven husbands,
whatever the buggers' names were, suffocated in the one cesspool. _(He
explodes in a loud phlegmy laugh)_ We'll manure you, Mr Flower! _(He
pipes scoffingly)_ Byby, Poldy! Byby, Papli!

BLOOM: _(Clasps his head)_ My willpower! Memory! I have sinned! I have
suff...

_(He weeps tearlessly)_

BELLO: _(Sneers)_ Crybabby! Crocodile tears!

_(Bloom, broken, closely veiled for the sacrifice, sobs, his face to
the earth. The passing bell is heard. Darkshawled figures of the
circumcised, in sackcloth and ashes, stand by the wailing wall. M.
Shulomowitz, Joseph Goldwater, Moses Herzog, Harris Rosenberg, M.
Moisel, J. Citron, Minnie Watchman, P. Mastiansky, The Reverend Leopold
Abramovitz, Chazen. With swaying arms they wail in pneuma over the
recreant Bloom.)_

THE CIRCUMCISED: _(In dark guttural chant as they cast dead sea fruit
upon him, no flowers) Shema Israel Adonai Elohenu Adonai Echad._

VOICES: _(Sighing)_ So he's gone. Ah yes. Yes, indeed. Bloom? Never
heard of him. No? Queer kind of chap. There's the widow. That so? Ah,
yes.

_(From the suttee pyre the flame of gum camphire ascends. The pall of
incense smoke screens and disperses. Out of her oakframe a nymph with
hair unbound, lightly clad in teabrown artcolours, descends from her
grotto and passing under interlacing yews stands over Bloom.)_

THE YEWS: _(Their leaves whispering)_ Sister. Our sister. Ssh!

THE NYMPH: _(Softly)_ Mortal! _(Kindly)_ Nay, dost not weepest!

BLOOM: _(Crawls jellily forward under the boughs, streaked by sunlight,
with dignity)_ This position. I felt it was expected of me. Force of
habit.

THE NYMPH: Mortal! You found me in evil company, highkickers, coster
picnicmakers, pugilists, popular generals, immoral panto boys in
fleshtights and the nifty shimmy dancers, La Aurora and Karini, musical
act, the hit of the century. I was hidden in cheap pink paper that smelt
of rock oil. I was surrounded by the stale smut of clubmen, stories to
disturb callow youth, ads for transparencies, truedup dice and bustpads,
proprietary articles and why wear a truss with testimonial from ruptured
gentleman. Useful hints to the married.

BLOOM: _(Lifts a turtle head towards her lap)_ We have met before. On
another star.

THE NYMPH: _(Sadly)_ Rubber goods. Neverrip brand as supplied to the
aristocracy. Corsets for men. I cure fits or money refunded. Unsolicited
testimonials for Professor Waldmann's wonderful chest exuber. My bust
developed four inches in three weeks, reports Mrs Gus Rublin with photo.

BLOOM: You mean _Photo Bits?_

THE NYMPH: I do. You bore me away, framed me in oak and tinsel, set me
above your marriage couch. Unseen, one summer eve, you kissed me in
four places. And with loving pencil you shaded my eyes, my bosom and my
shame.

BLOOM: _(Humbly kisses her long hair)_ Your classic curves, beautiful
immortal, I was glad to look on you, to praise you, a thing of beauty,
almost to pray.

THE NYMPH: During dark nights I heard your praise.

BLOOM: _(Quickly)_ Yes, yes. You mean that I... Sleep reveals the worst
side of everyone, children perhaps excepted. I know I fell out of bed
or rather was pushed. Steel wine is said to cure snoring. For the rest
there is that English invention, pamphlet of which I received some days
ago, incorrectly addressed. It claims to afford a noiseless, inoffensive
vent. _(He sighs)_ 'Twas ever thus. Frailty, thy name is marriage.

THE NYMPH: _(Her fingers in her ears)_ And words. They are not in my
dictionary.

BLOOM: You understood them?

THE YEWS: Ssh!

THE NYMPH: _(Covers her face with her hands)_ What have I not seen in
that chamber? What must my eyes look down on?

BLOOM: _(Apologetically)_ I know. Soiled personal linen, wrong side up
with care. The quoits are loose. From Gibraltar by long sea long ago.

THE NYMPH: _(Bends her head)_ Worse, worse!

BLOOM: _(Reflects precautiously)_ That antiquated commode. It wasn't her
weight. She scaled just eleven stone nine. She put on nine pounds
after weaning. It was a crack and want of glue. Eh? And that absurd
orangekeyed utensil which has only one handle.

_(The sound of a waterfall is heard in bright cascade.)_

THE WATERFALL:

     Poulaphouca Poulaphouca
     Poulaphouca Poulaphouca.

THE YEWS: _(Mingling their boughs)_ Listen. Whisper. She is right, our
sister. We grew by Poulaphouca waterfall. We gave shade on languorous
summer days.


JOHN WYSE NOLAN: _(In the background, in Irish National Forester's
uniform, doffs his plumed hat)_ Prosper! Give shade on languorous days,
trees of Ireland!

THE YEWS: _(Murmuring)_ Who came to Poulaphouca with the High School
excursion? Who left his nutquesting classmates to seek our shade?

BLOOM: _(Scared)_ High School of Poula? Mnemo? Not in full possession of
faculties. Concussion. Run over by tram.

THE ECHO: Sham!

BLOOM: _(Pigeonbreasted, bottleshouldered, padded, in nondescript
juvenile grey and black striped suit, too small for him, white tennis
shoes, bordered stockings with turnover tops and a red schoolcap with
badge)_ I was in my teens, a growing boy. A little then sufficed, a
jolting car, the mingling odours of the ladies' cloakroom and lavatory,
the throng penned tight on the old Royal stairs (for they love crushes,
instinct of the herd, and the dark sexsmelling theatre unbridles
vice), even a pricelist of their hosiery. And then the heat. There were
sunspots that summer. End of school. And tipsycake. Halcyon days.

_(Halcyon days, high school boys in blue and white football jerseys and
shorts, Master Donald Turnbull, Master Abraham Chatterton, Master Owen
Goldberg, Master Jack Meredith, Master Percy Apjohn, stand in a clearing
of the trees and shout to Master Leopold Bloom.)_

THE HALCYON DAYS: Mackerel! Live us again. Hurray! _(They cheer)_

BLOOM: _(Hobbledehoy, warmgloved, mammamufflered, starred with spent
snowballs, struggles to rise)_ Again! I feel sixteen! What a lark! Let's
ring all the bells in Montague street. _(He cheers feebly)_ Hurray for
the High School!

THE ECHO: Fool!

THE YEWS: _(Rustling)_ She is right, our sister. Whisper. _(Whispered
kisses are heard in all the wood. Faces of hamadryads peep out from
the boles and among the leaves and break, blossoming into bloom.)_ Who
profaned our silent shade?

THE NYMPH: _(Coyly, through parting fingers)_ There? In the open air?

THE YEWS: _(Sweeping downward)_ Sister, yes. And on our virgin sward.

THE WATERFALL:

     Poulaphouca Poulaphouca
     Phoucaphouca Phoucaphouca.

THE NYMPH: _(With wide fingers)_ O, infamy!

BLOOM: I was precocious. Youth. The fauna. I sacrificed to the god of
the forest. The flowers that bloom in the spring. It was pairing
time. Capillary attraction is a natural phenomenon. Lotty Clarke,
flaxenhaired, I saw at her night toilette through illclosed curtains
with poor papa's operaglasses: The wanton ate grass wildly. She rolled
downhill at Rialto bridge to tempt me with her flow of animal spirits.
She climbed their crooked tree and I... A saint couldn't resist it. The
demon possessed me. Besides, who saw?

_(Staggering Bob, a whitepolled calf, thrusts a ruminating head with
humid nostrils through the foliage.)_

STAGGERING BOB: (LARGE TEARDROPS ROLLING FROM HIS PROMINENT EYES,
SNIVELS) Me. Me see.

BLOOM: Simply satisfying a need I... _(With pathos)_ No girl would when
I went girling. Too ugly. They wouldn't play...

_(High on Ben Howth through rhododendrons a nannygoat passes,
plumpuddered, buttytailed, dropping currants.)_

THE NANNYGOAT: _(Bleats)_ Megeggaggegg! Nannannanny!

BLOOM: _(Hatless, flushed, covered with burrs of thistledown and
gorsespine)_ Regularly engaged. Circumstances alter cases. _(He gazes
intently downwards on the water)_ Thirtytwo head over heels per second.
Press nightmare. Giddy Elijah. Fall from cliff. Sad end of government
printer's clerk. _(Through silversilent summer air the dummy of Bloom,
rolled in a mummy, rolls roteatingly from the Lion's Head cliff into the
purple waiting waters.)_

THE DUMMYMUMMY: Bbbbblllllblblblblobschbg!

_(Far out in the bay between bailey and kish lights the_ Erin's King
_sails, sending a broadening plume of coalsmoke from her funnel towards
the land.)_

COUNCILLOR NANNETII: _(Alone on deck, in dark alpaca, yellowkitefaced,
his hand in his waistcoat opening, declaims)_ When my country takes her
place among the nations of the earth, then, and not till then, let my
epitaph be written. I have...

BLOOM: Done. Prff!

THE NYMPH: _(Loftily)_ We immortals, as you saw today, have not such
a place and no hair there either. We are stonecold and pure. We eat
electric light. _(She arches her body in lascivious crispation, placing
her forefinger in her mouth)_ Spoke to me. Heard from behind. How then
could you...?

BLOOM: _(Pawing the heather abjectly)_ O, I have been a perfect pig.
Enemas too I have administered. One third of a pint of quassia to which
add a tablespoonful of rocksalt. Up the fundament. With Hamilton Long's
syringe, the ladies' friend.

THE NYMPH: In my presence. The powderpuff. _(She blushes and makes a
knee)_ And the rest!

BLOOM: _(Dejected)_ Yes. _Peccavi!_ I have paid homage on that living
altar where the back changes name. _(With sudden fervour)_ For why
should the dainty scented jewelled hand, the hand that rules...?

_(Figures wind serpenting in slow woodland pattern around the treestems,
cooeeing)_

THE VOICE OF KITTY: _(In the thicket)_ Show us one of them cushions.

THE VOICE OF FLORRY: Here.

_(A grouse wings clumsily through the underwood.)_

THE VOICE OF LYNCH: _(In the thicket)_ Whew! Piping hot!

THE VOICE OF ZOE: _(From the thicket)_ Came from a hot place.

THE VOICE OF VIRAG: _(A birdchief, bluestreaked and feathered in war
panoply with his assegai, striding through a crackling canebrake over
beechmast and acorns)_ Hot! Hot! Ware Sitting Bull!

BLOOM: It overpowers me. The warm impress of her warm form. Even to sit
where a woman has sat, especially with divaricated thighs, as though to
grant the last favours, most especially with previously well uplifted
white sateen coatpans. So womanly, full. It fills me full.

THE WATERFALL:

     _Phillaphulla Poulaphouca
     Poulaphouca Poulaphouca._

THE YEWS: Ssh! Sister, speak!

THE NYMPH: _(Eyeless, in nun's white habit, coif and hugewinged wimple,
softly, with remote eyes)_ Tranquilla convent. Sister Agatha. Mount
Carmel. The apparitions of Knock and Lourdes. No more desire. _(She
reclines her head, sighing)_ Only the ethereal. Where dreamy creamy gull
waves o'er the waters dull.

_(Bloom half rises. His back trouserbutton snaps.)_

THE BUTTON: Bip!

_(Two sluts of the coombe dance rainily by, shawled, yelling flatly.)_

THE SLUTS:

     O, Leopold lost the pin of his drawers
     He didn't know what to do,
     To keep it up,
     To keep it up.

BLOOM: _(Coldly)_ You have broken the spell. The last straw. If there
were only ethereal where would you all be, postulants and novices? Shy
but willing like an ass pissing.

THE YEWS: _(Their silverfoil of leaves precipitating, their skinny arms
aging and swaying)_ Deciduously!

THE NYMPH: _(Her features hardening, gropes in the folds of her habit)_
Sacrilege! To attempt my virtue! _(A large moist stain appears on her
robe)_ Sully my innocence! You are not fit to touch the garment of a
pure woman. _(She clutches again in her robe)_ Wait. Satan, you'll sing
no more lovesongs. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. _(She draws a poniard and,
clad in the sheathmail of an elected knight of nine, strikes at his
loins)_ Nekum!

BLOOM: _(Starts up, seizes her hand)_ Hoy! Nebrakada! Cat o' nine lives!
Fair play, madam. No pruningknife. The fox and the grapes, is it? What
do you lack with your barbed wire? Crucifix not thick enough? _(He
clutches her veil)_ A holy abbot you want or Brophy, the lame gardener,
or the spoutless statue of the watercarrier, or good mother Alphonsus,
eh Reynard?

THE NYMPH: _(With a cry flees from him unveiled, her plaster cast
cracking, a cloud of stench escaping from the cracks)_ Poli...!

BLOOM: _(Calls after her)_ As if you didn't get it on the double
yourselves. No jerks and multiple mucosities all over you. I tried it.
Your strength our weakness. What's our studfee? What will you pay on
the nail? You fee mendancers on the Riviera, I read. _(The fleeing nymph
raises a keen)_ Eh? I have sixteen years of black slave labour behind
me. And would a jury give me five shillings alimony tomorrow, eh? Fool
someone else, not me. _(He sniffs)_ Rut. Onions. Stale. Sulphur. Grease.

_(The figure of Bella Cohen stands before him.)_

BELLA: You'll know me the next time.

BLOOM: _(Composed, regards her) PassÃ©e._ Mutton dressed as lamb. Long
in the tooth and superfluous hair. A raw onion the last thing at night
would benefit your complexion. And take some double chin drill. Your
eyes are as vapid as the glasseyes of your stuffed fox. They have the
dimensions of your other features, that's all. I'm not a triple screw
propeller.

BELLA: _(Contemptuously)_ You're not game, in fact. _(Her sowcunt
barks)_ Fbhracht!

BLOOM: _(Contemptuously)_ Clean your nailless middle finger first, your
bully's cold spunk is dripping from your cockscomb. Take a handful of
hay and wipe yourself.

BELLA: I know you, canvasser! Dead cod!

BLOOM: I saw him, kipkeeper! Pox and gleet vendor!

BELLA: _(Turns to the piano)_ Which of you was playing the dead march
from _Saul?_

ZOE: Me. Mind your cornflowers. _(She darts to the piano and bangs
chords on it with crossed arms)_ The cat's ramble through the slag.
_(She glances back)_ Eh? Who's making love to my sweeties? _(She darts
back to the table)_ What's yours is mine and what's mine is my own.

_(Kitty, disconcerted, coats her teeth with the silver paper. Bloom
approaches Zoe.)_

BLOOM: _(Gently)_ Give me back that potato, will you?

ZOE: Forfeits, a fine thing and a superfine thing.

BLOOM: _(With feeling)_ It is nothing, but still, a relic of poor mamma.

ZOE:

     Give a thing and take it back
     God'll ask you where is that
     You'll say you don't know
     God'll send you down below.

BLOOM: There is a memory attached to it. I should like to have it.

STEPHEN: To have or not to have that is the question.

ZOE: Here. _(She hauls up a reef of her slip, revealing her bare thigh,
and unrolls the potato from the top of her stocking)_ Those that hides
knows where to find.

BELLA: _(Frowns)_ Here. This isn't a musical peepshow. And don't you
smash that piano. Who's paying here?

_(She goes to the pianola. Stephen fumbles in his pocket and, taking out
a banknote by its corner, hands it to her.)_

STEPHEN: _(With exaggerated politeness)_ This silken purse I made out
of the sow's ear of the public. Madam, excuse me. If you allow me. _(He
indicates vaguely Lynch and Bloom)_ We are all in the same sweepstake,
Kinch and Lynch. _Dans ce bordel ou tenons nostre Ã©tat_.

LYNCH: _(Calls from the hearth)_ Dedalus! Give her your blessing for me.

STEPHEN: _(Hands Bella a coin)_ Gold. She has it.

BELLA: _(Looks at the money, then at Stephen, then at Zoe, Florry and
Kitty)_ Do you want three girls? It's ten shillings here.

STEPHEN: _(Delightedly)_ A hundred thousand apologies. _(He fumbles
again and takes out and hands her two crowns)_ Permit, _brevi manu_, my
sight is somewhat troubled.

_(Bella goes to the table to count the money while Stephen talks to
himself in monosyllables. Zoe bends over the table. Kitty leans over
Zoe's neck. Lynch gets up, rights his cap and, clasping Kitty's waist,
adds his head to the group.)_

FLORRY: _(Strives heavily to rise)_ Ow! My foot's asleep. _(She limps
over to the table. Bloom approaches.)_

BELLA, ZOE, KITTY, LYNCH, BLOOM: _(Chattering and squabbling)_ The
gentleman... ten shillings... paying for the three... allow me a
moment... this gentleman pays separate... who's touching it?... ow!
... mind who you're pinching... are you staying the night or a short
time?... who did?... you're a liar, excuse me... the gentleman paid
down like a gentleman... drink... it's long after eleven.

STEPHEN: _(At the pianola, making a gesture of abhorrence)_ No bottles!
What, eleven? A riddle!

ZOE: _(Lifting up her pettigown and folding a half sovereign into the
top of her stocking)_ Hard earned on the flat of my back.

LYNCH: _(Lifting Kitty from the table)_ Come!

KITTY: Wait. _(She clutches the two crowns)_

FLORRY: And me?

LYNCH: Hoopla! _(He lifts her, carries her and bumps her down on the
sofa.)_

STEPHEN:

     The fox crew, the cocks flew,
     The bells in heaven
     Were striking eleven.
     'Tis time for her poor soul
     To get out of heaven.

BLOOM: _(Quietly lays a half sovereign on the table between bella and
florry)_ So. Allow me. _(He takes up the poundnote)_ Three times ten.
We're square.

BELLA: _(Admiringly)_ You're such a slyboots, old cocky. I could kiss
you.

ZOE: _(Points)_ Him? Deep as a drawwell. _(Lynch bends Kitty back over
the sofa and kisses her. Bloom goes with the poundnote to Stephen.)_

BLOOM: This is yours.

STEPHEN: How is that? _Les distrait_ or absentminded beggar. _(He
fumbles again in his pocket and draws out a handful of coins. An object
fills.)_ That fell.

BLOOM: _(Stooping, picks up and hands a box of matches)_ This.

STEPHEN: Lucifer. Thanks.

BLOOM: _(Quietly)_ You had better hand over that cash to me to take care
of. Why pay more?

STEPHEN: _(Hands him all his coins)_ Be just before you are generous.

BLOOM: I will but is it wise? _(He counts)_ One, seven, eleven, and
five. Six. Eleven. I don't answer for what you may have lost.
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

STEPHEN: Why striking eleven? Proparoxyton. Moment before the next
Lessing says. Thirsty fox. _(He laughs loudly)_ Burying his grandmother.
Probably he killed her.

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation
=======
BLOOM: That is one pound six and eleven. One pound seven, say.

STEPHEN: Doesn't matter a rambling damn.

BLOOM: No, but...

STEPHEN: _(Comes to the table)_ Cigarette, please. _(Lynch tosses a
cigarette from the sofa to the table)_ And so Georgina Johnson is dead
and married. _(A cigarette appears on the table. Stephen looks at it)_
Wonder. Parlour magic. Married. Hm. _(He strikes a match and proceeds to
light the cigarette with enigmatic melancholy)_

LYNCH: _(Watching him)_ You would have a better chance of lighting it if
you held the match nearer.

STEPHEN: _(Brings the match near his eye)_ Lynx eye. Must get glasses.
Broke them yesterday. Sixteen years ago. Distance. The eye sees all
flat. _(He draws the match away. It goes out.)_ Brain thinks. Near:
far. Ineluctable modality of the visible. _(He frowns mysteriously)_ Hm.
Sphinx. The beast that has twobacks at midnight. Married.

ZOE: It was a commercial traveller married her and took her away with
him.

FLORRY: _(Nods)_ Mr Lambe from London.

STEPHEN: Lamb of London, who takest away the sins of our world.

LYNCH: _(Embracing Kitty on the sofa, chants deeply) Dona nobis pacem._

_(The cigarette slips from Stephen 's fingers. Bloom picks it up and
throws it in the grate.)_

BLOOM: Don't smoke. You ought to eat. Cursed dog I met. _(To Zoe)_ You
have nothing?

ZOE: Is he hungry?

STEPHEN: _(Extends his hand to her smiling and chants to the air of the
bloodoath in the_ Dusk of the Gods)

     Hangende Hunger,
     Fragende Frau,
     Macht uns alle kaputt.


ZOE: _(Tragically)_ Hamlet, I am thy father's gimlet! _(She takes
his hand)_ Blue eyes beauty I'll read your hand. _(She points to his
forehead)_ No wit, no wrinkles. _(She counts)_ Two, three, Mars, that's
courage. _(Stephen shakes his head)_ No kid.

LYNCH: Sheet lightning courage. The youth who could not shiver and
shake. _(To Zoe)_ Who taught you palmistry?

ZOE: _(Turns)_ Ask my ballocks that I haven't got. _(To Stephen)_ I see
it in your face. The eye, like that. _(She frowns with lowered head)_

LYNCH: _(Laughing, slaps Kitty behind twice)_ Like that. Pandybat.

_(Twice loudly a pandybat cracks, the coffin of the pianola flies open,
the bald little round jack-in-the-box head of Father Dolan springs up.)_

FATHER DOLAN: Any boy want flogging? Broke his glasses? Lazy idle little
schemer. See it in your eye.

_(Mild, benign, rectorial, reproving, the head of Don John Conmee rises
from the pianola coffin.)_

DON JOHN CONMEE: Now, Father Dolan! Now. I'm sure that Stephen is a very
good little boy!

ZOE: _(Examining Stephen's palm)_ Woman's hand.

STEPHEN: _(Murmurs)_ Continue. Lie. Hold me. Caress. I never could read
His handwriting except His criminal thumbprint on the haddock.

ZOE: What day were you born?

STEPHEN: Thursday. Today.

ZOE: Thursday's child has far to go. _(She traces lines on his hand)_
Line of fate. Influential friends.

FLORRY: _(Pointing)_ Imagination.

ZOE: Mount of the moon. You'll meet with a... _(She peers at his hands
abruptly)_ I won't tell you what's not good for you. Or do you want to
know?

BLOOM: _(Detaches her fingers and offers his palm)_ More harm than good.
Here. Read mine.

BELLA: Show. _(She turns up bloom's hand)_ I thought so. Knobby knuckles
for the women.

ZOE: _(Peering at bloom's palm)_ Gridiron. Travels beyond the sea and
marry money.

BLOOM: Wrong.

ZOE: _(Quickly)_ O, I see. Short little finger. Henpecked husband. That
wrong?

_(Black Liz, a huge rooster hatching in a chalked circle, rises,
stretches her wings and clucks.)_

BLACK LIZ: Gara. Klook. Klook. Klook.

_(She sidles from her newlaid egg and waddles off)_

BLOOM: _(Points to his hand)_ That weal there is an accident. Fell and
cut it twentytwo years ago. I was sixteen.

ZOE: I see, says the blind man. Tell us news.

STEPHEN: See? Moves to one great goal. I am twentytwo. Sixteen years ago
he was twentytwo too. Sixteen years ago I twentytwo tumbled. Twentytwo
years ago he sixteen fell off his hobbyhorse. _(He winces)_ Hurt my hand
somewhere. Must see a dentist. Money?

_(Zoe whispers to Florry. They giggle. Bloom releases his hand and
writes idly on the table in backhand, pencilling slow curves.)_

FLORRY: What?

_(A hackneycar, number three hundred and twentyfour, with a
gallantbuttocked mare, driven by James Barton, Harmony Avenue,
Donnybrook, trots past. Blazes Boylan and Lenehan sprawl swaying on the
sideseats. The Ormond boots crouches behind on the axle. Sadly over the
crossblind Lydia Douce and Mina Kennedy gaze.)_

THE BOOTS: _(Jogging, mocks them with thumb and wriggling wormfingers)_
Haw haw have you the horn?

_(Bronze by gold they whisper.)_

ZOE: _(To Florry)_ Whisper.

_(They whisper again)_

_(Over the well of the car Blazes Boylan leans, his boater straw set
sideways, a red flower in his mouth. Lenehan in yachtsman's cap and
white shoes officiously detaches a long hair from Blazes Boylan's coat
shoulder.)_

LENEHAN: Ho! What do I here behold? Were you brushing the cobwebs off a
few quims?

BOYLAN: _(Seated, smiles)_ Plucking a turkey.

LENEHAN: A good night's work.

BOYLAN: _(Holding up four thick bluntungulated fingers, winks)_ Blazes
Kate! Up to sample or your money back. _(He holds out a forefinger)_
Smell that.

LENEHAN: _(Smells gleefully)_ Ah! Lobster and mayonnaise. Ah!

ZOE AND FLORRY: _(Laugh together)_ Ha ha ha ha.

BOYLAN: _(Jumps surely from the car and calls loudly for all to hear)_
Hello, Bloom! Mrs Bloom dressed yet?

BLOOM: _(In flunkey's prune plush coat and kneebreeches, buff stockings
and powdered wig)_ I'm afraid not, sir. The last articles...

BOYLAN: _(Tosses him sixpence)_ Here, to buy yourself a gin and splash.
_(He hangs his hat smartly on a peg of Bloom's antlered head)_ Show me
in. I have a little private business with your wife, you understand?

BLOOM: Thank you, sir. Yes, sir. Madam Tweedy is in her bath, sir.

MARION: He ought to feel himself highly honoured. _(She plops splashing
out of the water)_ Raoul darling, come and dry me. I'm in my pelt. Only
my new hat and a carriage sponge.

BOYLAN: _(A merry twinkle in his eye)_ Topping!

BELLA: What? What is it?

_(Zoe whispers to her.)_

MARION: Let him look, the pishogue! Pimp! And scourge himself! I'll
write to a powerful prostitute or Bartholomona, the bearded woman, to
raise weals out on him an inch thick and make him bring me back a signed
and stamped receipt.

BOYLAN: (clasps himself) Here, I can't hold this little lot much longer.
(he strides off on stiff cavalry legs)

BELLA: _(Laughing)_ Ho ho ho ho.

BOYLAN: _(To Bloom, over his shoulder)_ You can apply your eye to the
keyhole and play with yourself while I just go through her a few times.

BLOOM: Thank you, sir. I will, sir. May I bring two men chums to witness
the deed and take a snapshot? _(He holds out an ointment jar)_ Vaseline,
sir? Orangeflower...? Lukewarm water...?

KITTY: _(From the sofa)_ Tell us, Florry. Tell us. What.

_(Florry whispers to her. Whispering lovewords murmur, liplapping
loudly, poppysmic plopslop.)_

MINA KENNEDY: _(Her eyes upturned)_ O, it must be like the scent of
geraniums and lovely peaches! O, he simply idolises every bit of her!
Stuck together! Covered with kisses!

LYDIA DOUCE: _(Her mouth opening)_ Yumyum. O, he's carrying her round
the room doing it! Ride a cockhorse. You could hear them in Paris and
New York. Like mouthfuls of strawberries and cream.

KITTY: _(Laughing)_ Hee hee hee.

BOYLAN'S VOICE: _(Sweetly, hoarsely, in the pit of his stomach)_ Ah!
Gooblazqruk brukarchkrasht!

MARION'S VOICE: _(Hoarsely, sweetly, rising to her throat)_ O!
Weeshwashtkissinapooisthnapoohuck?

BLOOM: _(His eyes wildly dilated, clasps himself)_ Show! Hide! Show!
Plough her! More! Shoot!

BELLA, ZOE, FLORRY, KITTY: Ho ho! Ha ha! Hee hee!

LYNCH: _(Points)_ The mirror up to nature. _(He laughs)_ Hu hu hu hu hu!

_(Stephen and Bloom gaze in the mirror. The face of William Shakespeare,
beardless, appears there, rigid in facial paralysis, crowned by the
reflection of the reindeer antlered hatrack in the hall.)_

SHAKESPEARE: _(In dignified ventriloquy)_ 'Tis the loud laugh bespeaks
the vacant mind. _(To Bloom)_ Thou thoughtest as how thou wastest
invisible. Gaze. _(He crows with a black capon's laugh)_ Iagogo! How my
Oldfellow chokit his Thursdaymornun. Iagogogo!
>>>>>>> Stashed changes

BLOOM: _(Smiles yellowly at the three whores)_ When will I hear the
joke?

<<<<<<< Updated upstream
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




=======
ZOE: Before you're twice married and once a widower.

BLOOM: Lapses are condoned. Even the great Napoleon when measurements
were taken next the skin after his death...

_(Mrs Dignam, widow woman, her snubnose and cheeks flushed with
deathtalk, tears and Tunney's tawny sherry, hurries by in her weeds,
her bonnet awry, rouging and powdering her cheeks, lips and nose, a
pen chivvying her brood of cygnets. Beneath her skirt appear her late
husband's everyday trousers and turnedup boots, large eights. She holds
a Scottish widows' insurance policy and a large marquee umbrella under
which her brood run with her, Patsy hopping on one shod foot, his collar
loose, a hank of porksteaks dangling, freddy whimpering, Susy with a
crying cod's mouth, Alice struggling with the baby. She cuffs them on,
her streamers flaunting aloft.)_

FREDDY: Ah, ma, you're dragging me along!

SUSY: Mamma, the beeftea is fizzing over!

SHAKESPEARE: _(With paralytic rage)_ Weda seca whokilla farst.

_(The face of Martin Cunningham, bearded, refeatures Shakespeare's
beardless face. The marquee umbrella sways drunkenly, the children run
aside. Under the umbrella appears Mrs Cunningham in Merry Widow hat and
kimono gown. She glides sidling and bowing, twirling japanesily.)_

MRS CUNNINGHAM: _(Sings)_

And they call me the jewel of Asia!

MARTIN CUNNINGHAM: _(Gazes on her, impassive)_ Immense! Most bloody
awful demirep!

STEPHEN: _Et exaltabuntur cornua iusti._ Queens lay with prize bulls.
Remember Pasiphae for whose lust my grandoldgrossfather made the first
confessionbox. Forget not Madam Grissel Steevens nor the suine scions
of the house of Lambert. And Noah was drunk with wine. And his ark was
open.

BELLA: None of that here. Come to the wrong shop.

LYNCH: Let him alone. He's back from Paris.

ZOE: _(Runs to stephen and links him)_ O go on! Give us some parleyvoo.

_(Stephen claps hat on head and leaps over to the fireplace where he
stands with shrugged shoulders, finny hands outspread, a painted smile
on his face.)_

LYNCH: _(Oommelling on the sofa)_ Rmm Rmm Rmm Rrrrrrmmmm.

STEPHEN: _(Gabbles with marionette jerks)_ Thousand places of
entertainment to expense your evenings with lovely ladies saling gloves
and other things perhaps hers heart beerchops perfect fashionable
house very eccentric where lots cocottes beautiful dressed much about
princesses like are dancing cancan and walking there parisian clowneries
extra foolish for bachelors foreigns the same if talking a poor english
how much smart they are on things love and sensations voluptuous.
Misters very selects for is pleasure must to visit heaven and hell show
with mortuary candles and they tears silver which occur every night.
Perfectly shocking terrific of religion's things mockery seen in
universal world. All chic womans which arrive full of modesty then
disrobe and squeal loud to see vampire man debauch nun very fresh young
with _dessous troublants_. _(He clacks his tongue loudly)_ _Ho, la la!
Ce pif qu'il a!_

LYNCH: _Vive le vampire!_

THE WHORES: Bravo! Parleyvoo!

STEPHEN: _(Grimacing with head back, laughs loudly, clapping himself)_
Great success of laughing. Angels much prostitutes like and holy
apostles big damn ruffians. _Demimondaines_ nicely handsome sparkling of
diamonds very amiable costumed. Or do you are fond better what belongs
they moderns pleasure turpitude of old mans? _(He points about him with
grotesque gestures which Lynch and the whores reply to)_ Caoutchouc
statue woman reversible or lifesize tompeeptom of virgins nudities very
lesbic the kiss five ten times. Enter, gentleman, to see in mirror every
positions trapezes all that machine there besides also if desire act
awfully bestial butcher's boy pollutes in warm veal liver or omlet on
the belly _piÃ¨ce de Shakespeare._

BELLA: _(Clapping her belly sinks back on the sofa, with a shout of
laughter)_ An omelette on the... Ho! ho! ho! ho!... omelette on the...

STEPHEN: _(Mincingly)_ I love you, sir darling. Speak you englishman
tongue for _double entente cordiale._ O yes, _mon loup_. How much cost?
Waterloo. Watercloset. _(He ceases suddenly and holds up a forefinger)_

BELLA: _(Laughing)_ Omelette...

THE WHORES: _(Laughing)_ Encore! Encore!

STEPHEN: Mark me. I dreamt of a watermelon.

ZOE: Go abroad and love a foreign lady.

LYNCH: Across the world for a wife.

FLORRY: Dreams goes by contraries.

STEPHEN: _(Extends his arms)_ It was here. Street of harlots. In
Serpentine avenue Beelzebub showed me her, a fubsy widow. Where's the
red carpet spread?

BLOOM: _(Approaching Stephen)_ Look...

STEPHEN: No, I flew. My foes beneath me. And ever shall be. World
without end. _(He cries) P_ater! Free!

BLOOM: I say, look...

STEPHEN: Break my spirit, will he? _O merde alors! (He cries, his
vulture talons sharpened)_ Hola! Hillyho!

_(Simon Dedalus' voice hilloes in answer, somewhat sleepy but ready.)_

SIMON: That's all right. _(He swoops uncertainly through the air,
wheeling, uttering cries of heartening, on strong ponderous buzzard
wings)_ Ho, boy! Are you going to win? Hoop! Pschatt! Stable with those
halfcastes. Wouldn't let them within the bawl of an ass. Head up! Keep
our flag flying! An eagle gules volant in a field argent displayed.
Ulster king at arms! Haihoop! _(He makes the beagle's call, giving
tongue)_ Bulbul! Burblblburblbl! Hai, boy!

_(The fronds and spaces of the wallpaper file rapidly across country.
A stout fox, drawn from covert, brush pointed, having buried his
grandmother, runs swift for the open, brighteyed, seeking badger earth,
under the leaves. The pack of staghounds follows, nose to the ground,
sniffing their quarry, beaglebaying, burblbrbling to be blooded. Ward
Union huntsmen and huntswomen live with them, hot for a kill. From Six
Mile Point, Flathouse, Nine Mile Stone follow the footpeople with knotty
sticks, hayforks, salmongaffs, lassos, flockmasters with stockwhips,
bearbaiters with tomtoms, toreadors with bullswords, greynegroes
waving torches. The crowd bawls of dicers, crown and anchor players,
thimbleriggers, broadsmen. Crows and touts, hoarse bookies in high
wizard hats clamour deafeningly.)_

THE CROWD:

     Card of the races. Racing card!
     Ten to one the field!
     Tommy on the clay here! Tommy on the clay!
     Ten to one bar one! Ten to one bar one!
     Try your luck on Spinning Jenny!
     Ten to one bar one!
     Sell the monkey, boys! Sell the monkey!
     I'll give ten to one!
     Ten to one bar one!

_(A dark horse, riderless, bolts like a phantom past the winningpost,
his mane moonfoaming, his eyeballs stars. The field follows, a bunch of
bucking mounts. Skeleton horses, Sceptre, Maximum the Second, Zinfandel,
the Duke of Westminster's Shotover, Repulse, the Duke of Beaufort's
Ceylon, prix de Paris. Dwarfs ride them, rustyarmoured, leaping, leaping
in their, in their saddles. Last in a drizzle of rain on a brokenwinded
isabelle nag, Cock of the North, the favourite, honey cap, green jacket,
orange sleeves, Garrett Deasy up, gripping the reins, a hockeystick at
the ready. His nag on spavined whitegaitered feet jogs along the rocky
road.)_

THE ORANGE LODGES: _(Jeering)_ Get down and push, mister. Last lap!
You'll be home the night!

GARRETT DEASY: _(Bolt upright, his nailscraped face plastered with
postagestamps, brandishes his hockeystick, his blue eyes flashing in the
prism of the chandelier as his mount lopes by at schooling gallop)_

_Per vias rectas!_

_(A yoke of buckets leopards all over him and his rearing nag a torrent
of mutton broth with dancing coins of carrots, barley, onions, turnips,
potatoes.)_

THE GREEN LODGES: Soft day, sir John! Soft day, your honour!

_(Private Carr, Private Compton and Cissy Caffrey pass beneath the
windows, singing in discord.)_

STEPHEN: Hark! Our friend noise in the street.

ZOE: _(Holds up her hand)_ Stop!

PRIVATE CARR, PRIVATE COMPTON AND CISSY CAFFREY:

Yet I've a sort a Yorkshire relish for...

ZOE: That's me. _(She claps her hands)_ Dance! Dance! _(She runs to the
pianola)_ Who has twopence?

BLOOM: Who'll...?

LYNCH: _(Handing her coins)_ Here.

STEPHEN: _(Cracking his fingers impatiently)_ Quick! Quick! Where's my
augur's rod? _(He runs to the piano and takes his ashplant, beating his
foot in tripudium)_

ZOE: _(Turns the drumhandle)_ There.

_(She drops two pennies in the slot. Gold, pink and violet lights
start forth. The drum turns purring in low hesitation waltz. Professor
Goodwin, in a bowknotted periwig, in court dress, wearing a stained
inverness cape, bent in two from incredible age, totters across the
room, his hands fluttering. He sits tinily on the pianostool and lifts
and beats handless sticks of arms on the keyboard, nodding with damsel's
grace, his bowknot bobbing)_

ZOE: _(Twirls round herself, heeltapping)_ Dance. Anybody here for
there? Who'll dance? Clear the table.

_(The pianola with changing lights plays in waltz time the prelude of_
My Girl's a Yorkshire Girl. _Stephen throws his ashplant on the table
and seizes Zoe round the waist. Florry and Bella push the table towards
the fireplace. Stephen, arming Zoe with exaggerated grace, begins to
waltz her round the room. Bloom stands aside. Her sleeve filling from
gracing arms reveals a white fleshflower of vaccination. Between the
curtains Professor Maginni inserts a leg on the toepoint of which spins
a silk hat. With a deft kick he sends it spinning to his crown and
jauntyhatted skates in. He wears a slate frockcoat with claret silk
lapels, a gorget of cream tulle, a green lowcut waistcoat, stock collar
with white kerchief, tight lavender trousers, patent pumps and canary
gloves. In his buttonhole is an immense dahlia. He twirls in reversed
directions a clouded cane, then wedges it tight in his oxter. He places
a hand lightly on his breastbone, bows, and fondles his flower and
buttons.)_

MAGINNI: The poetry of motion, art of calisthenics. No connection
with Madam Legget Byrne's or Levenston's. Fancy dress balls arranged.
Deportment. The Katty Lanner step. So. Watch me! My terpsichorean
abilities. _(He minuets forward three paces on tripping bee's feet) Tout
le monde en avant! RÃ©vÃ©rence! Tout le monde en place!_

_(The prelude ceases. Professor Goodwin, beating vague arms shrivels,
sinks, his live cape filling about the stool. The air in firmer waltz
time sounds. Stephen and Zoe circle freely. The lights change, glow,
fide gold rosy violet.)_

THE PIANOLA:

Two young fellows were talking about their girls, girls, girls,
Sweethearts they'd left behind...

_(From a corner the morning hours run out, goldhaired, slimsandalled,
in girlish blue, waspwaisted, with innocent hands. Nimbly they dance,
twirling their skipping ropes. The hours of noon follow in amber gold.
Laughing, linked, high haircombs flashing, they catch the sun in mocking
mirrors, lifting their arms.)_

MAGINNI: _(Clipclaps glovesilent hands) CarrÃ©! Avant deux!_ Breathe
evenly! _Balance!_

_(The morning and noon hours waltz in their places, turning, advancing
to each other, shaping their curves, bowing visavis. Cavaliers behind
them arch and suspend their arms, with hands descending to, touching,
rising from their shoulders.)_

HOURS: You may touch my.

CAVALIERS: May I touch your?

HOURS: O, but lightly!

CAVALIERS: O, so lightly!

THE PIANOLA:

My little shy little lass has a waist.

_(Zoe and Stephen turn boldly with looser swing. The twilight hours
advance from long landshadows, dispersed, lagging, languideyed, their
cheeks delicate with cipria and false faint bloom. They are in grey
gauze with dark bat sleeves that flutter in the land breeze.)_

MAGINNI: _Avant huit! TraversÃ©! Salut! Cours de mains! CroisÃ©!_

_(The night hours, one by one, steal to the last place. Morning, noon
and twilight hours retreat before them. They are masked, with daggered
hair and bracelets of dull bells. Weary they curchycurchy under veils.)_

THE BRACELETS: Heigho! Heigho!

ZOE: _(Twirling, her hand to her brow)_ O!

MAGINNI: _Les tiroirs! ChaÃ®ne de dames! La corbeille! Dos Ã  dos!_

_(Arabesquing wearily they weave a pattern on the floor, weaving,
unweaving, curtseying, twirling, simply swirling.)_

ZOE: I'm giddy!

_(She frees herself, droops on a chair. Stephen seizes Florry and turns
with her.)_

MAGINNI: BoulangÃ¨re! Les ronds! Les ponts! Chevaux de bois! Escargots!

_(Twining, receding, with interchanging hands the night hours link each
each with arching arms in a mosaic of movements. Stephen and Florry turn
cumbrously.)_

MAGINNI: _Dansez avec vos dames! Changez de dames! Donnez le petit
bouquet Ã  votre dame! Remerciez!_

THE PIANOLA:

     Best, best of all,
     Baraabum!

KITTY: (JUMPS UP) O, they played that on the hobbyhorses at the Mirus
bazaar!

_(She runs to Stephen. He leaves florry brusquely and seizes Kitty.
A screaming bittern's harsh high whistle shrieks. Groangrousegurgling
Toft's cumbersome whirligig turns slowly the room right roundabout the
room.)_

THE PIANOLA:

     My girl's a Yorkshire girl.

ZOE:

Yorkshire through and through.

Come on all!

_(She seizes Florry and waltzes her.)_

STEPHEN: _Pas seul!_

_(He wheels Kitty into Lynch's arms, snatches up his ashplant from
the table and takes the floor. All wheel whirl waltz twirl. Bloombella
Kittylynch Florryzoe jujuby women. Stephen with hat ashplant frogsplits
in middle highkicks with skykicking mouth shut hand clasp part under
thigh. With clang tinkle boomhammer tallyho hornblower blue green yellow
flashes Toft's cumbersome turns with hobbyhorse riders from gilded
snakes dangled, bowels fandango leaping spurn soil foot and fall
again.)_

THE PIANOLA:

     Though she's a factory lass
     And wears no fancy clothes.

_(Closeclutched swift swifter with glareblareflare scudding they
scootlootshoot lumbering by. Baraabum!)_

TUTTI: Encore! Bis! Bravo! Encore!

SIMON: Think of your mother's people!

STEPHEN: Dance of death.

_(Bang fresh barang bang of lacquey's bell, horse, nag, steer, piglings,
Conmee on Christass, lame crutch and leg sailor in cockboat armfolded
ropepulling hitching stamp hornpipe through and through. Baraabum! On
nags hogs bellhorses Gadarene swine Corny in coffin Steel shark stone
onehandled nelson two trickies Frauenzimmer plumstained from pram
filling bawling gum he's a champion. Fuseblue peer from barrel rev.
evensong Love on hackney jaunt Blazes blind coddoubled bicyclers Dilly
with snowcake no fancy clothes. Then in last switchback lumbering up
and down bump mashtub sort of viceroy and reine relish for tublumber
bumpshire rose. Baraabum!)_

_(The couples fall aside. Stephen whirls giddily. Room whirls back. Eyes
closed he totters. Red rails fly spacewards. Stars all around suns turn
roundabout. Bright midges dance on walls. He stops dead.)_

STEPHEN: Ho!

_(Stephen's mother, emaciated, rises stark through the floor, in leper
grey with a wreath of faded orangeblossoms and a torn bridal veil, her
face worn and noseless, green with gravemould. Her hair is scant and
lank. She fixes her bluecircled hollow eyesockets on Stephen and opens
her toothless mouth uttering a silent word. A choir of virgins and
confessors sing voicelessly.)_

THE CHOIR:

     Liliata rutilantium te confessorum...
     Iubilantium te virginum...

_(from the top of a tower Buck Mulligan, in particoloured jester's dress
of puce and yellow and clown's cap with curling bell, stands gaping at
her, a smoking buttered split scone in his hand.)_

BUCK MULLIGAN: She's beastly dead. The pity of it! Mulligan meets the
afflicted mother. _(He upturns his eyes)_ Mercurial Malachi!

THE MOTHER: _(With the subtle smile of death's madness)_ I was once the
beautiful May Goulding. I am dead.

STEPHEN: _(Horrorstruck)_ Lemur, who are you? No. What bogeyman's trick
is this?

BUCK MULLIGAN: _(Shakes his curling capbell)_ The mockery of it! Kinch
dogsbody killed her bitchbody. She kicked the bucket. _(Tears of molten
butter fall from his eyes on to the scone)_ Our great sweet mother! _Epi
oinopa ponton._

THE MOTHER: _(Comes nearer, breathing upon him softly her breath of
wetted ashes)_ All must go through it, Stephen. More women than men in
the world. You too. Time will come.

STEPHEN: _(Choking with fright, remorse and horror)_ They say I killed
you, mother. He offended your memory. Cancer did it, not I. Destiny.

THE MOTHER: _(A green rill of bile trickling from a side of her mouth)_
You sang that song to me. _Love's bitter mystery._

STEPHEN: _(Eagerly)_ Tell me the word, mother, if you know now. The word
known to all men.

THE MOTHER: Who saved you the night you jumped into the train at
Dalkey with Paddy Lee? Who had pity for you when you were sad among the
strangers? Prayer is allpowerful. Prayer for the suffering souls in the
Ursuline manual and forty days' indulgence. Repent, Stephen.

STEPHEN: The ghoul! Hyena!

THE MOTHER: I pray for you in my other world. Get Dilly to make you that
boiled rice every night after your brainwork. Years and years I loved
you, O, my son, my firstborn, when you lay in my womb.

ZOE: _(Fanning herself with the grate fan)_ I'm melting!

FLORRY: _(Points to Stephen)_ Look! He's white.

BLOOM: _(Goes to the window to open it more)_ Giddy.

THE MOTHER: _(With smouldering eyes)_ Repent! O, the fire of hell!

STEPHEN: _(Panting)_ His noncorrosive sublimate! The corpsechewer! Raw
head and bloody bones.

THE MOTHER: _(Her face drawing near and nearer, sending out an ashen
breath)_ Beware! _(She raises her blackened withered right arm slowly
towards Stephen's breast with outstretched finger)_ Beware God's hand!
_(A green crab with malignant red eyes sticks deep its grinning claws in
Stephen's heart.)_

STEPHEN: _(Strangled with rage)_ Shite! _(His features grow drawn grey
and old)_

BLOOM: _(At the window)_ What?

STEPHEN: _Ah non, par exemple!_ The intellectual imagination! With me
all or not at all. _Non serviam!_

FLORRY: Give him some cold water. Wait. _(She rushes out)_

THE MOTHER: _(Wrings her hands slowly, moaning desperately)_ O Sacred
Heart of Jesus, have mercy on him! Save him from hell, O Divine Sacred
Heart!

STEPHEN: No! No! No! Break my spirit, all of you, if you can! I'll bring
you all to heel!

THE MOTHER: _(In the agony of her deathrattle)_ Have mercy on Stephen,
Lord, for my sake! Inexpressible was my anguish when expiring with love,
grief and agony on Mount Calvary.

STEPHEN: _Nothung_!

_(He lifts his ashplant high with both hands and smashes the chandelier.
Time's livid final flame leaps and, in the following darkness, ruin of
all space, shattered glass and toppling masonry.)_

THE GASJET: Pwfungg!

BLOOM: Stop!

LYNCH: _(Rushes forward and seizes Stephen's hand)_ Here! Hold on! Don't
run amok!

BELLA: Police!

_(Stephen, abandoning his ashplant, his head and arms thrown back stark,
beats the ground and flies from the room, past the whores at the door.)_

BELLA: _(Screams)_ After him!

_(The two whores rush to the halldoor. Lynch and Kitty and Zoe stampede
from the room. They talk excitedly. Bloom follows, returns.)_

THE WHORES: _(Jammed in the doorway, pointing)_ Down there.

ZOE: _(Pointing)_ There. There's something up.

BELLA: Who pays for the lamp? _(She seizes Bloom's coattail)_ Here, you
were with him. The lamp's broken.

BLOOM: _(Rushes to the hall, rushes back)_ What lamp, woman?

A WHORE: He tore his coat.

BELLA: _(Her eyes hard with anger and cupidity, points)_ Who's to pay
for that? Ten shillings. You're a witness.

BLOOM: _(Snatches up Stephen's ashplant)_ Me? Ten shillings? Haven't you
lifted enough off him? Didn't he...?

BELLA: _(Loudly)_ Here, none of your tall talk. This isn't a brothel. A
ten shilling house.

BLOOM: _(His head under the lamp, pulls the chain. Puling, the gasjet
lights up a crushed mauve purple shade. He raises the ashplant.)_ Only
the chimney's broken. Here is all he...

BELLA: _(Shrinks back and screams)_ Jesus! Don't!

BLOOM: _(Warding off a blow)_ To show you how he hit the paper. There's
not sixpenceworth of damage done. Ten shillings!

FLORRY: _(With a glass of water, enters)_ Where is he?

BELLA: Do you want me to call the police?

BLOOM: O, I know. Bulldog on the premises. But he's a Trinity student.
Patrons of your establishment. Gentlemen that pay the rent. _(He makes
a masonic sign)_ Know what I mean? Nephew of the vice-chancellor. You
don't want a scandal.

BELLA: _(Angrily)_ Trinity. Coming down here ragging after the boatraces
and paying nothing. Are you my commander here or? Where is he? I'll
charge him! Disgrace him, I will! (She Shouts) Zoe! Zoe!

BLOOM: _(Urgently)_ And if it were your own son in Oxford? _(Warningly)_
I know.

BELLA: _(Almost speechless)_ Who are. Incog!

ZOE: _(In the doorway)_ There's a row on.

BLOOM: What? Where? _(He throws a shilling on the table and starts)_
That's for the chimney. Where? I need mountain air.

_(He hurries out through the hall. The whores point. Florry follows,
spilling water from her tilted tumbler. On the doorstep all the whores
clustered talk volubly, pointing to the right where the fog has cleared
off. From the left arrives a jingling hackney car. It slows to in front
of the house. Bloom at the halldoor perceives Corny Kelleher who is
about to dismount from the car with two silent lechers. He averts
his face. Bella from within the hall urges on her whores. They blow
ickylickysticky yumyum kisses. Corny Kelleher replies with a ghastly
lewd smile. The silent lechers turn to pay the jarvey. Zoe and Kitty
still point right. Bloom, parting them swiftly, draws his caliph's hood
and poncho and hurries down the steps with sideways face. Incog Haroun
al Raschid he flits behind the silent lechers and hastens on by the
railings with fleet step of a pard strewing the drag behind him, torn
envelopes drenched in aniseed. The ashplant marks his stride. A pack
of bloodhounds, led by Hornblower of Trinity brandishing a dogwhip in
tallyho cap and an old pair of grey trousers, follow from fir, picking
up the scent, nearer, baying, panting, at fault, breaking away, throwing
their tongues, biting his heels, leaping at his tail. He walks,
runs, zigzags, gallops, lugs laid back. He is pelted with gravel,
cabbagestumps, biscuitboxes, eggs, potatoes, dead codfish, woman's
slipperslappers. After him freshfound the hue and cry zigzag gallops
in hot pursuit of follow my leader: 65 C, 66 C, night watch, John Henry
Menton, Wisdom Hely, V. B. Dillon, Councillor Nannetti, Alexander Keyes,
Larry O'rourke, Joe Cuffe Mrs O'dowd, Pisser Burke, The Nameless One,
Mrs Riordan, The Citizen, Garryowen, Whodoyoucallhim, Strangeface,
Fellowthatsolike, Sawhimbefore, Chapwithawen, Chris Callinan, Sir
Charles Cameron, Benjamin Dollard, Lenehan, Bartell d'Arcy, Joe Hynes,
red Murray, editor Brayden, T. M. Healy, Mr Justice Fitzgibbon, John
Howard Parnell, the reverend Tinned Salmon, Professor Joly, Mrs
Breen, Denis Breen, Theodore Purefoy, Mina Purefoy, the Westland
Row postmistress, C. P. M'Coy, friend of Lyons, Hoppy Holohan,
maninthestreet, othermaninthestreet, Footballboots, pugnosed driver,
rich protestant lady, Davy Byrne, Mrs Ellen M'Guinness, Mrs Joe
Gallaher, George Lidwell, Jimmy Henry on corns, Superintendent Laracy,
Father Cowley, Crofton out of the Collector-general's, Dan Dawson,
dental surgeon Bloom with tweezers, Mrs Bob Doran, Mrs Kennefick, Mrs
Wyse Nolan, John Wyse Nolan, handsomemarriedwomanrubbedagainstwide
behindinClonskeatram, the bookseller of_ Sweets of Sin, _Miss
Dubedatandshedidbedad, Mesdames Gerald and Stanislaus Moran of Roebuck,
the managing clerk of Drimmie's, Wetherup, colonel Hayes, Mastiansky,
Citron, Penrose, Aaron Figatner, Moses Herzog, Michael E Geraghty,
Inspector Troy, Mrs Galbraith, the constable off Eccles Street corner,
old doctor Brady with stethoscope, the mystery man on the beach, a
retriever, Mrs Miriam Dandrade and all her lovers.)_

THE HUE AND CRY: _(Helterskelterpelterwelter)_ He's Bloom! Stop Bloom!
Stopabloom! Stopperrobber! Hi! Hi! Stophim on the corner!

_(At the corner of Beaver Street beneath the scaffolding Bloom panting
stops on the fringe of the noisy quarrelling knot, a lot not knowing a
jot what hi! hi! row and wrangle round the whowhat brawlaltogether.)_

STEPHEN: _(With elaborate gestures, breathing deeply and slowly)_ You
are my guests. Uninvited. By virtue of the fifth of George and seventh
of Edward. History to blame. Fabled by mothers of memory.

PRIVATE CARR: _(To Cissy Caffrey)_ Was he insulting you?

STEPHEN: Addressed her in vocative feminine. Probably neuter.
Ungenitive.

VOICES: No, he didn't. I seen him. The girl there. He was in Mrs
Cohen's. What's up? Soldier and civilian.

CISSY CAFFREY: I was in company with the soldiers and they left me to
do--you know, and the young man run up behind me. But I'm faithful to
the man that's treating me though I'm only a shilling whore.

STEPHEN: _(Catches sight of Lynch's and Kitty's heads)_ Hail, Sisyphus.
_(He points to himself and the others)_ Poetic. Uropoetic.

VOICES: Shes faithfultheman.

CISSY CAFFREY: Yes, to go with him. And me with a soldier friend.

PRIVATE COMPTON: He doesn't half want a thick ear, the blighter. Biff
him one, Harry.

PRIVATE CARR: _(To Cissy)_ Was he insulting you while me and him was
having a piss?

LORD TENNYSON: _(Gentleman poet in Union Jack blazer and cricket
flannels, bareheaded, flowingbearded)_ Theirs not to reason why.

PRIVATE COMPTON: Biff him, Harry.

STEPHEN: _(To Private Compton)_ I don't know your name but you are quite
right. Doctor Swift says one man in armour will beat ten men in their
shirts. Shirt is synechdoche. Part for the whole.

CISSY CAFFREY: _(To The Crowd)_ No, I was with the privates.

STEPHEN: _(Amiably)_ Why not? The bold soldier boy. In my opinion every
lady for example...

PRIVATE CARR: _(His cap awry, advances to Stephen)_ Say, how would it
be, governor, if I was to bash in your jaw?

STEPHEN: _(Looks up to the sky)_ How? Very unpleasant. Noble art of
selfpretence. Personally, I detest action. _(He waves his hand)_ Hand
hurts me slightly. _Enfin ce sont vos oignons._ _(To Cissy Caffrey)_
Some trouble is on here. What is it precisely?

DOLLY GRAY: _(From her balcony waves her handkerchief, giving the sign
of the heroine of Jericho)_ Rahab. Cook's son, goodbye. Safe home to
Dolly. Dream of the girl you left behind and she will dream of you.

_(The soldiers turn their swimming eyes.)_

BLOOM: _(Elbowing through the crowd, plucks Stephen's sleeve
vigorously)_ Come now, professor, that carman is waiting.

STEPHEN: _(Turns)_ Eh? _(He disengages himself)_ Why should I not speak
to him or to any human being who walks upright upon this oblate orange?
_(He points his finger)_ I'm not afraid of what I can talk to if I see
his eye. Retaining the perpendicular.

_(He staggers a pace back)_

BLOOM: _(Propping him)_ Retain your own.

STEPHEN: _(Laughs emptily)_ My centre of gravity is displaced. I have
forgotten the trick. Let us sit down somewhere and discuss. Struggle
for life is the law of existence but but human philirenists, notably the
tsar and the king of England, have invented arbitration. _(He taps his
brow)_ But in here it is I must kill the priest and the king.

BIDDY THE CLAP: Did you hear what the professor said? He's a professor
out of the college.

CUNTY KATE: I did. I heard that.

BIDDY THE CLAP: He expresses himself with such marked refinement of
phraseology.

CUNTY KATE: Indeed, yes. And at the same time with such apposite
trenchancy.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Pulls himself free and comes forward)_ What's that
you're saying about my king?

_(Edward the Seventh appears in an archway. He wars a white jersey on
which an image of the Sacred Heart is stitched with the insignia of
Garter and Thistle, Golden Fleece, Elephant of Denmark, Skinner's
and Probyn's horse, Lincoln's Inn bencher and ancient and honourable
artillery company of Massachusetts. He sucks a red jujube. He is robed
as a grand elect perfect and sublime mason with trowel and apron,
marked_ made in Germany. _In his left hand he holds a plasterer's bucket
on which is printed_ DÃ©fense d'uriner. _A roar of welcome greets him.)_

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: _(Slowly, solemnly but indistinctly)_ Peace, perfect
peace. For identification, bucket in my hand. Cheerio, boys. _(He turns
to his subjects)_ We have come here to witness a clean straight fight
and we heartily wish both men the best of good luck. Mahak makar a bak.

_(He shakes hands with Private Carr, Private Compton, Stephen, Bloom and
Lynch. General applause. Edward the Seventh lifts his bucket graciously
in acknowledgment.)_

PRIVATE CARR: _(To Stephen)_ Say it again.

STEPHEN: _(Nervous, friendly, pulls himself up)_ I understand your point
of view though I have no king myself for the moment. This is the age of
patent medicines. A discussion is difficult down here. But this is the
point. You die for your country. Suppose. _(He places his arm on Private
Carr's sleeve)_ Not that I wish it for you. But I say: Let my country
die for me. Up to the present it has done so. I didn't want it to die.
Damn death. Long live life!

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: _(Levitates over heaps of slain, in the garb and
with the halo of Joking Jesus, a white jujube in his phosphorescent
face)_

My methods are new and are causing surprise. To make the blind see I
throw dust in their eyes.

STEPHEN: Kings and unicorns! _(He fills back a pace)_ Come somewhere and
we'll... What was that girl saying?...

PRIVATE COMPTON: Eh, Harry, give him a kick in the knackers. Stick one
into Jerry.

BLOOM: _(To the privates, softly)_ He doesn't know what he's saying.
Taken a little more than is good for him. Absinthe. Greeneyed monster. I
know him. He's a gentleman, a poet. It's all right.

STEPHEN: _(Nods, smiling and laughing)_ Gentleman, patriot, scholar and
judge of impostors.

PRIVATE CARR: I don't give a bugger who he is.

PRIVATE COMPTON: We don't give a bugger who he is.

STEPHEN: I seem to annoy them. Green rag to a bull.

_(Kevin Egan of Paris in black Spanish tasselled shirt and peep-o'-day
boy's hat signs to Stephen.)_

KEVIN EGAN: H'lo! _Bonjour!_ The _vieille ogresse_ with the _dents
jaunes_.

_(Patrice Egan peeps from behind, his rabbitface nibbling a quince
leaf.)_

PATRICE: _Socialiste!_

DON EMILE PATRIZIO FRANZ RUPERT POPE HENNESSY: _(In medieval hauberk,
two wild geese volant on his helm, with noble indignation points a
mailed hand against the privates)_ Werf those eykes to footboden, big
grand porcos of johnyellows todos covered of gravy!

BLOOM: _(To Stephen)_ Come home. You'll get into trouble.

STEPHEN: _(Swaying)_ I don't avoid it. He provokes my intelligence.

BIDDY THE CLAP: One immediately observes that he is of patrician
lineage.

THE VIRAGO: Green above the red, says he. Wolfe Tone.

THE BAWD: The red's as good as the green. And better. Up the soldiers!
Up King Edward!

A ROUGH: _(Laughs)_ Ay! Hands up to De Wet.

THE CITIZEN: _(With a huge emerald muffler and shillelagh, calls)_

     May the God above
     Send down a dove
     With teeth as sharp as razors
     To slit the throats
     Of the English dogs
     That hanged our Irish leaders.

THE CROPPY BOY: _(The ropenoose round his neck, gripes in his issuing
bowels with both hands)_

I bear no hate to a living thing, But I love my country beyond the king.

RUMBOLD, DEMON BARBER: _(Accompanied by two blackmasked assistants,
advances with gladstone bag which he opens)_ Ladies and gents,
cleaver purchased by Mrs Pearcy to slay Mogg. Knife with which Voisin
dismembered the wife of a compatriot and hid remains in a sheet in the
cellar, the unfortunate female's throat being cut from ear to ear. Phial
containing arsenic retrieved from body of Miss Barron which sent Seddon
to the gallows.

_(He jerks the rope. The assistants leap at the victim's legs and drag
him downward, grunting the croppy boy's tongue protrudes violently.)_

THE CROPPY BOY:

Horhot ho hray hor hother's hest.

_(He gives up the ghost. A violent erection of the hanged sends gouts
of sperm spouting through his deathclothes on to the cobblestones. Mrs
Bellingham, Mrs Yelverton Barry and the Honourable Mrs Mervyn Talboys
rush forward with their handkerchiefs to sop it up.)_

RUMBOLD: I'm near it myself. _(He undoes the noose)_ Rope which hanged
the awful rebel. Ten shillings a time. As applied to Her Royal Highness.
_(He plunges his head into the gaping belly of the hanged and draws out
his head again clotted with coiled and smoking entrails)_ My painful
duty has now been done. God save the king!

EDWARD THE SEVENTH: _(Dances slowly, solemnly, rattling his bucket, and
sings with soft contentment)_

On coronation day, on coronation day, O, won't we have a merry time,
Drinking whisky, beer and wine!

PRIVATE CARR: Here. What are you saying about my king?

STEPHEN: _(Throws up his hands)_ O, this is too monotonous! Nothing.
He wants my money and my life, though want must be his master, for
some brutish empire of his. Money I haven't. _(He searches his pockets
vaguely)_ GAVE IT TO SOMEONE.

PRIVATE CARR: Who wants your bleeding money?

STEPHEN: _(Tries to move off)_ Will someone tell me where I am least
likely to meet these necessary evils? _Ãa se voit aussi Ã  paris._ Not
that I... But, by Saint Patrick...!

_(The women's heads coalesce. Old Gummy Granny in sugarloaf hat appears
seated on a toadstool, the deathflower of the potato blight on her
breast.)_

STEPHEN: Aha! I know you, gammer! Hamlet, revenge! The old sow that eats
her farrow!

OLD GUMMY GRANNY: _(Rocking to and fro)_ Ireland's sweetheart, the king
of Spain's daughter, alanna. Strangers in my house, bad manners to them!
_(She keens with banshee woe)_ Ochone! Ochone! Silk of the kine! _(She
wails)_ You met with poor old Ireland and how does she stand?

STEPHEN: How do I stand you? The hat trick! Where's the third person of
the Blessed Trinity? Soggarth Aroon? The reverend Carrion Crow.

CISSY CAFFREY: _(Shrill)_ Stop them from fighting!

A ROUGH: Our men retreated.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Tugging at his belt)_ I'll wring the neck of any fucker
says a word against my fucking king.

BLOOM: _(Terrified)_ He said nothing. Not a word. A pure
misunderstanding.

THE CITIZEN: _Erin go bragh!_

_(Major Tweedy and the Citizen exhibit to each other medals,
decorations, trophies of war, wounds. Both salute with fierce
hostility.)_

PRIVATE COMPTON: Go it, Harry. Do him one in the eye. He's a proboer.

STEPHEN: Did I? When?

BLOOM: _(To the redcoats)_ We fought for you in South Africa, Irish
missile troops. Isn't that history? Royal Dublin Fusiliers. Honoured by
our monarch.

THE NAVVY: _(Staggering past)_ O, yes! O God, yes! O, make the kwawr a
krowawr! O! Bo!

_(Casqued halberdiers in armour thrust forward a pentice of gutted
spearpoints. Major Tweedy, moustached like Turko the terrible, in
bearskin cap with hackleplume and accoutrements, with epaulettes, gilt
chevrons and sabretaches, his breast bright with medals, toes the line.
He gives the pilgrim warrior's sign of the knights templars.)_

MAJOR TWEEDY: _(Growls gruffly)_ Rorke's Drift! Up, guards, and at them!
Mahar shalal hashbaz.

PRIVATE CARR: I'll do him in.

PRIVATE COMPTON: _(Waves the crowd back)_ Fair play, here. Make a
bleeding butcher's shop of the bugger.

_(Massed bands blare_ Garryowen _and_ God save the King.)

CISSY CAFFREY: They're going to fight. For me!

CUNTY KATE: The brave and the fair.

BIDDY THE CLAP: Methinks yon sable knight will joust it with the best.

CUNTY KATE: _(Blushing deeply)_ Nay, madam. The gules doublet and merry
saint George for me!

STEPHEN:

The harlot's cry from street to street Shall weave Old Ireland's
windingsheet.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Loosening his belt, shouts)_ I'll wring the neck of any
fucking bastard says a word against my bleeding fucking king.

BLOOM: _(Shakes Cissy Caffrey's shoulders)_ Speak, you! Are you struck
dumb? You are the link between nations and generations. Speak, woman,
sacred lifegiver!

CISSY CAFFREY: _(Alarmed, seizes Private Carr's sleeve)_ Amn't I with
you? Amn't I your girl? Cissy's your girl. _(She cries)_ Police!

STEPHEN: _(Ecstatically, to Cissy Caffrey)_

     White thy fambles, red thy gan
     And thy quarrons dainty is.


VOICES: Police!

DISTANT VOICES: Dublin's burning! Dublin's burning! On fire, on fire!

_(Brimstone fires spring up. Dense clouds roll past. Heavy Gatling guns
boom. Pandemonium. Troops deploy. Gallop of hoofs. Artillery. Hoarse
commands. Bells clang. Backers shout. Drunkards bawl. Whores screech.
Foghorns hoot. Cries of valour. Shrieks of dying. Pikes clash on
cuirasses. Thieves rob the slain. Birds of prey, winging from the sea,
rising from marshlands, swooping from eyries, hover screaming, gannets,
cormorants, vultures, goshawks, climbing woodcocks, peregrines, merlins,
blackgrouse, sea eagles, gulls, albatrosses, barnacle geese. The
midnight sun is darkened. The earth trembles. The dead of Dublin
from Prospect and Mount Jerome in white sheepskin overcoats and black
goatfell cloaks arise and appear to many. A chasm opens with a noiseless
yawn. Tom Rochford, winner, in athlete's singlet and breeches, arrives
at the head of the national hurdle handicap and leaps into the void.
He is followed by a race of runners and leapers. In wild attitudes they
spring from the brink. Their bodies plunge. Factory lasses with fancy
clothes toss redhot Yorkshire baraabombs. Society ladies lift their
skirts above their heads to protect themselves. Laughing witches in red
cutty sarks ride through the air on broomsticks. Quakerlyster plasters
blisters. It rains dragons' teeth. Armed heroes spring up from furrows.
They exchange in amity the pass of knights of the red cross and fight
duels with cavalry sabres: Wolfe Tone against Henry Grattan, Smith
O'Brien against Daniel O'Connell, Michael Davitt against Isaac Butt,
Justin M'Carthy against Parnell, Arthur Griffith against John Redmond,
John O'Leary against Lear O'Johnny, Lord Edward Fitzgerald against Lord
Gerald Fitzedward, The O'Donoghue of the Glens against The Glens of The
O'Donoghue. On an eminence, the centre of the earth, rises the feldaltar
of Saint Barbara. Black candles rise from its gospel and epistle horns.
From the high barbacans of the tower two shafts of light fall on the
smokepalled altarstone. On the altarstone Mrs Mina Purefoy, goddess of
unreason, lies, naked, fettered, a chalice resting on her swollen belly.
Father Malachi O'Flynn in a lace petticoat and reversed chasuble, his
two left feet back to the front, celebrates camp mass. The Reverend Mr
Hugh C Haines Love M. A. in a plain cassock and mortarboard, his head
and collar back to the front, holds over the celebrant's head an open
umbrella.)_

FATHER MALACHI O'FLYNN: _Introibo ad altare diaboli._

THE REVEREND MR HAINES LOVE: To the devil which hath made glad my young
days.

FATHER MALACHI O'FLYNN: _(Takes from the chalice and elevates a
blooddripping host) Corpus meum._

THE REVEREND MR HAINES LOVE: _(Raises high behind the celebrant's
petticoat, revealing his grey bare hairy buttocks between which a carrot
is stuck)_ My body.

THE VOICE OF ALL THE DAMNED: Htengier Tnetopinmo Dog Drol eht rof,
Aiulella!

_(From on high the voice of Adonai calls.)_

ADONAI: Dooooooooooog!

THE VOICE OF ALL THE BLESSED: Alleluia, for the Lord God Omnipotent
reigneth!

_(From on high the voice of Adonai calls.)_

ADONAI: Goooooooooood!

_(In strident discord peasants and townsmen of Orange and Green factions
sing_ Kick the Pope _and_ Daily, daily sing to Mary.)

PRIVATE CARR: _(With ferocious articulation)_ I'll do him in, so help me
fucking Christ! I'll wring the bastard fucker's bleeding blasted fucking
windpipe!

OLD GUMMY GRANNY: _(Thrusts a dagger towards Stephen's hand)_ Remove
him, acushla. At 8.35 a.m. you will be in heaven and Ireland will be
free. _(She prays)_ O good God, take him!

(THE RETRIEVER, NOSING ON THE FRINGE OF THE CROWD, BARKS NOISILY.)

BLOOM: _(Runs to lynch)_ Can't you get him away?

LYNCH: He likes dialectic, the universal language. Kitty! _(To Bloom)_
Get him away, you. He won't listen to me.

_(He drags Kitty away.)_

STEPHEN: _(Points) exit Judas. Et laqueo se suspendit._

BLOOM: _(Runs to Stephen)_ Come along with me now before worse happens.
Here's your stick.

STEPHEN: Stick, no. Reason. This feast of pure reason.

CISSY CAFFREY: _(Pulling Private Carr)_ Come on, you're boosed. He
insulted me but I forgive him. _(Shouting in his ear)_ I forgive him for
insulting me.

BLOOM: _(Over Stephen's shoulder)_ Yes, go. You see he's incapable.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Breaks loose)_ I'll insult him.

_(He rushes towards Stephen, fist outstretched, and strikes him in the
face. Stephen totters, collapses, falls, stunned. He lies prone, his
face to the sky, his hat rolling to the wall. Bloom follows and picks it
up.)_

MAJOR TWEEDY: _(Loudly)_ Carbine in bucket! Cease fire! Salute!

THE RETRIEVER: _(Barking furiously)_ Ute ute ute ute ute ute ute ute.

THE CROWD: Let him up! Don't strike him when he's down! Air! Who? The
soldier hit him. He's a professor. Is he hurted? Don't manhandle him!
He's fainted!

A HAG: What call had the redcoat to strike the gentleman and he under
the influence. Let them go and fight the Boers!

THE BAWD: Listen to who's talking! Hasn't the soldier a right to go with
his girl? He gave him the coward's blow.

_(They grab at each other's hair, claw at each other and spit)_

THE RETRIEVER: _(Barking)_ Wow wow wow.

BLOOM: _(Shoves them back, loudly)_ Get back, stand back!

PRIVATE COMPTON: _(Tugging his comrade)_ Here. Bugger off, Harry. Here's
the cops! _(Two raincaped watch, tall, stand in the group.)_

FIRST WATCH: What's wrong here?

PRIVATE COMPTON: We were with this lady. And he insulted us. And
assaulted my chum. _(The retriever barks)_ Who owns the bleeding tyke?

CISSY CAFFREY: _(With expectation)_ Is he bleeding!

A MAN: _(Rising from his knees)_ No. Gone off. He'll come to all right.

BLOOM: _(Glances sharply at the man)_ Leave him to me. I can easily...

SECOND WATCH: Who are you? Do you know him?

PRIVATE CARR: _(Lurches towards the watch)_ He insulted my lady friend.

BLOOM: _(Angrily)_ You hit him without provocation. I'm a witness.
Constable, take his regimental number.

SECOND WATCH: I don't want your instructions in the discharge of my
duty.

PRIVATE COMPTON: _(Pulling his comrade)_ Here, bugger off Harry. Or
Bennett'll shove you in the lockup.

PRIVATE CARR: _(Staggering as he is pulled away)_ God fuck old Bennett.
He's a whitearsed bugger. I don't give a shit for him.

FIRST WATCH: _(Takes out his notebook)_ What's his name?

BLOOM: _(Peering over the crowd)_ I just see a car there. If you give me
a hand a second, sergeant...

FIRST WATCH: Name and address.

_(Corny Kelleker, weepers round his hat, a death wreath in his hand,
appears among the bystanders.)_

BLOOM: _(Quickly)_ O, the very man! _(He whispers)_ Simon Dedalus' son.
A bit sprung. Get those policemen to move those loafers back.

SECOND WATCH: Night, Mr Kelleher.

CORNY KELLEHER: _(To the watch, with drawling eye)_ That's all right.
I know him. Won a bit on the races. Gold cup. Throwaway. _(He laughs)_
Twenty to one. Do you follow me?

FIRST WATCH: _(Turns to the crowd)_ Here, what are you all gaping at?
Move on out of that.

_(The crowd disperses slowly, muttering, down the lane.)_

CORNY KELLEHER: Leave it to me, sergeant. That'll be all right. _(He
laughs, shaking his head)_ We were often as bad ourselves, ay or worse.
What? Eh, what?

FIRST WATCH: _(Laughs)_ I suppose so.

CORNY KELLEHER: _(Nudges the second watch)_ Come and wipe your name off
the slate. _(He lilts, wagging his head)_ With my tooraloom tooraloom
tooraloom tooraloom. What, eh, do you follow me?

SECOND WATCH: _(Genially)_ Ah, sure we were too.

CORNY KELLEHER: _(Winking)_ Boys will be boys. I've a car round there.

SECOND WATCH: All right, Mr Kelleher. Good night.

CORNY KELLEHER: I'll see to that.

BLOOM: _(Shakes hands with both of the watch in turn)_ Thank you very
much, gentlemen. Thank you. _(He mumbles confidentially)_ We don't want
any scandal, you understand. Father is a wellknown highly respected
citizen. Just a little wild oats, you understand.

FIRST WATCH: O. I understand, sir.

SECOND WATCH: That's all right, sir.

FIRST WATCH: It was only in case of corporal injuries I'd have to report
it at the station.

BLOOM: _(Nods rapidly)_ Naturally. Quite right. Only your bounden duty.

SECOND WATCH: It's our duty.

CORNY KELLEHER: Good night, men.

THE WATCH: _(Saluting together)_ Night, gentlemen. _(They move off with
slow heavy tread)_

BLOOM: _(Blows)_ Providential you came on the scene. You have a car?...

CORNY KELLEHER: _(Laughs, pointing his thumb over his right shoulder to
the car brought up against the scaffolding)_ Two commercials that were
standing fizz in Jammet's. Like princes, faith. One of them lost two
quid on the race. Drowning his grief. And were on for a go with the
jolly girls. So I landed them up on Behan's car and down to nighttown.

BLOOM: I was just going home by Gardiner street when I happened to...

CORNY KELLEHER: _(Laughs)_ Sure they wanted me to join in with the mots.
No, by God, says I. Not for old stagers like myself and yourself. _(He
laughs again and leers with lacklustre eye)_ Thanks be to God we have it
in the house, what, eh, do you follow me? Hah, hah, hah!

BLOOM: _(Tries to laugh)_ He, he, he! Yes. Matter of fact I was just
visiting an old friend of mine there, Virag, you don't know him (poor
fellow, he's laid up for the past week) and we had a liquor together and
I was just making my way home...

_(The horse neighs.)_

THE HORSE: Hohohohohohoh! Hohohohome!

CORNY KELLEHER: Sure it was Behan our jarvey there that told me after
we left the two commercials in Mrs Cohen's and I told him to pull up and
got off to see. _(He laughs)_ Sober hearsedrivers a speciality. Will I
give him a lift home? Where does he hang out? Somewhere in Cabra, what?

BLOOM: No, in Sandycove, I believe, from what he let drop.

_(Stephen, prone, breathes to the stars. Corny Kelleher, asquint, drawls
at the horse. Bloom, in gloom, looms down.)_

CORNY KELLEHER: _(Scratches his nape)_ Sandycove! _(He bends down and
calls to Stephen)_ Eh! _(He calls again)_ Eh! He's covered with shavings
anyhow. Take care they didn't lift anything off him.

BLOOM: No, no, no. I have his money and his hat here and stick.

CORNY KELLEHER: Ah, well, he'll get over it. No bones broken. Well, I'll
shove along. _(He laughs)_ I've a rendezvous in the morning. Burying the
dead. Safe home!

THE HORSE: _(Neighs)_ Hohohohohome.

BLOOM: Good night. I'll just wait and take him along in a few...

_(Corny Kelleher returns to the outside car and mounts it. The horse
harness jingles.)_

CORNY KELLEHER: _(From the car, standing)_ Night.

BLOOM: Night.

_(The jarvey chucks the reins and raises his whip encouragingly. The
car and horse back slowly, awkwardly, and turn. Corny Kelleher on the
sideseat sways his head to and fro in sign of mirth at Bloom's plight.
The jarvey joins in the mute pantomimic merriment nodding from the
farther seat. Bloom shakes his head in mute mirthful reply. With thumb
and palm Corny Kelleher reassures that the two bobbies will allow the
sleep to continue for what else is to be done. With a slow nod Bloom
conveys his gratitude as that is exactly what Stephen needs. The car
jingles tooraloom round the corner of the tooraloom lane. Corny Kelleher
again reassuralooms with his hand. Bloom with his hand assuralooms Corny
Kelleher that he is reassuraloomtay. The tinkling hoofs and jingling
harness grow fainter with their tooralooloo looloo lay. Bloom, holding
in his hand Stephen's hat, festooned with shavings, and ashplant, stands
irresolute. Then he bends to him and shakes him by the shoulder.)_

BLOOM: Eh! Ho! _(There is no answer; he bends again)_ Mr Dedalus!
_(There is no answer)_ The name if you call. Somnambulist. _(He bends
again and hesitating, brings his mouth near the face of the prostrate
form)_ Stephen! _(There is no answer. He calls again.)_ Stephen!

STEPHEN: _(Groans)_ Who? Black panther. Vampire. _(He sighs and
stretches himself, then murmurs thickly with prolonged vowels)_

     Who... drive... Fergus now
     And pierce... wood's woven shade?...

_(He turns on his left side, sighing, doubling himself together.)_

BLOOM: Poetry. Well educated. Pity. _(He bends again and undoes
the buttons of Stephen's waistcoat)_ To breathe. _(He brushes the
woodshavings from Stephen's clothes with light hand and fingers)_ One
pound seven. Not hurt anyhow. _(He listens)_ What?

STEPHEN: _(Murmurs)_

    ... shadows... the woods
    ... white breast... dim sea.

_(He stretches out his arms, sighs again and curls his body. Bloom,
holding the hat and ashplant, stands erect. A dog barks in the distance.
Bloom tightens and loosens his grip on the ashplant. He looks down on
Stephen's face and form.)_

BLOOM: _(Communes with the night)_ Face reminds me of his poor mother.
In the shady wood. The deep white breast. Ferguson, I think I caught. A
girl. Some girl. Best thing could happen him. _(He murmurs)_... swear
that I will always hail, ever conceal, never reveal, any part or parts,
art or arts... _(He murmurs)_... in the rough sands of the sea... a
cabletow's length from the shore... where the tide ebbs... and flows
...

_(Silent, thoughtful, alert he stands on guard, his fingers at his lips
in the attitude of secret master. Against the dark wall a figure appears
slowly, a fairy boy of eleven, a changeling, kidnapped, dressed in an
eton suit with glass shoes and a little bronze helmet, holding a book
in his hand. He reads from right to left inaudibly, smiling, kissing the
page.)_

BLOOM: _(Wonderstruck, calls inaudibly)_ Rudy!

RUDY: _(Gazes, unseeing, into Bloom's eyes and goes on reading, kissing,
smiling. He has a delicate mauve face. On his suit he has diamond and
ruby buttons. In his free left hand he holds a slim ivory cane with a
violet bowknot. A white lambkin peeps out of his waistcoat pocket.)_




-- III --

Preparatory to anything else Mr Bloom brushed off the greater bulk of
the shavings and handed Stephen the hat and ashplant and bucked him up
generally in orthodox Samaritan fashion which he very badly needed. His
(Stephen's) mind was not exactly what you would call wandering but a bit
unsteady and on his expressed desire for some beverage to drink Mr
Bloom in view of the hour it was and there being no pump of Vartry water
available for their ablutions let alone drinking purposes hit upon an
expedient by suggesting, off the reel, the propriety of the cabman's
shelter, as it was called, hardly a stonesthrow away near Butt bridge
where they might hit upon some drinkables in the shape of a milk and
soda or a mineral. But how to get there was the rub. For the nonce he
was rather nonplussed but inasmuch as the duty plainly devolved upon him
to take some measures on the subject he pondered suitable ways and means
during which Stephen repeatedly yawned. So far as he could see he was
rather pale in the face so that it occurred to him as highly advisable
to get a conveyance of some description which would answer in their
then condition, both of them being e.d.ed, particularly Stephen, always
assuming that there was such a thing to be found. Accordingly after a
few such preliminaries as brushing, in spite of his having forgotten
to take up his rather soapsuddy handkerchief after it had done yeoman
service in the shaving line, they both walked together along Beaver
street or, more properly, lane as far as the farrier's and the
distinctly fetid atmosphere of the livery stables at the corner of
Montgomery street where they made tracks to the left from thence
debouching into Amiens street round by the corner of Dan Bergin's. But
as he confidently anticipated there was not a sign of a Jehu plying for
hire anywhere to be seen except a fourwheeler, probably engaged by some
fellows inside on the spree, outside the North Star hotel and there was
no symptom of its budging a quarter of an inch when Mr Bloom, who was
anything but a professional whistler, endeavoured to hail it by emitting
a kind of a whistle, holding his arms arched over his head, twice.

This was a quandary but, bringing common sense to bear on it, evidently
there was nothing for it but put a good face on the matter and foot it
which they accordingly did. So, bevelling around by Mullett's and the
Signal House which they shortly reached, they proceeded perforce in the
direction of Amiens street railway terminus, Mr Bloom being handicapped
by the circumstance that one of the back buttons of his trousers had,
to vary the timehonoured adage, gone the way of all buttons though,
entering thoroughly into the spirit of the thing, he heroically made
light of the mischance. So as neither of them were particularly pressed
for time, as it happened, and the temperature refreshing since it
cleared up after the recent visitation of Jupiter Pluvius, they dandered
along past by where the empty vehicle was waiting without a fare or a
jarvey. As it so happened a Dublin United Tramways Company's sandstrewer
happened to be returning and the elder man recounted to his companion _Ã 
propos_ of the incident his own truly miraculous escape of some little
while back. They passed the main entrance of the Great Northern railway
station, the starting point for Belfast, where of course all traffic was
suspended at that late hour and passing the backdoor of the morgue
(a not very enticing locality, not to say gruesome to a degree, more
especially at night) ultimately gained the Dock Tavern and in due course
turned into Store street, famous for its C division police station.
Between this point and the high at present unlit warehouses of Beresford
place Stephen thought to think of Ibsen, associated with Baird's the
stonecutter's in his mind somehow in Talbot place, first turning on the
right, while the other who was acting as his _fidus Achates_ inhaled
with internal satisfaction the smell of James Rourke's city bakery,
situated quite close to where they were, the very palatable odour indeed
of our daily bread, of all commodities of the public the primary and
most indispensable. Bread, the staff of life, earn your bread, O tell me
where is fancy bread, at Rourke's the baker's it is said.

_En route_ to his taciturn and, not to put too fine a point on it, not
yet perfectly sober companion Mr Bloom who at all events was in complete
possession of his faculties, never more so, in fact disgustingly sober,
spoke a word of caution re the dangers of nighttown, women of ill fame
and swell mobsmen, which, barely permissible once in a while though not
as a habitual practice, was of the nature of a regular deathtrap for
young fellows of his age particularly if they had acquired drinking
habits under the influence of liquor unless you knew a little jiujitsu
for every contingency as even a fellow on the broad of his back could
administer a nasty kick if you didn't look out. Highly providential
was the appearance on the scene of Corny Kelleher when Stephen was
blissfully unconscious but for that man in the gap turning up at the
eleventh hour the finis might have been that he might have been a
candidate for the accident ward or, failing that, the bridewell and
an appearance in the court next day before Mr Tobias or, he being the
solicitor rather, old Wall, he meant to say, or Mahony which simply
spelt ruin for a chap when it got bruited about. The reason he mentioned
the fact was that a lot of those policemen, whom he cordially disliked,
were admittedly unscrupulous in the service of the Crown and, as Mr
Bloom put it, recalling a case or two in the A division in Clanbrassil
street, prepared to swear a hole through a ten gallon pot. Never on
the spot when wanted but in quiet parts of the city, Pembroke road for
example, the

guardians of the law were well in evidence, the obvious reason being
they were paid to protect the upper classes. Another thing he commented
on was equipping soldiers with firearms or sidearms of any description
liable to go off at any time which was tantamount to inciting them
against civilians should by any chance they fall out over anything. You
frittered away your time, he very sensibly maintained, and health and
also character besides which, the squandermania of the thing, fast women
of the _demimonde_ ran away with a lot of l s. d. into the bargain and
the greatest danger of all was who you got drunk with though, touching
the much vexed question of stimulants, he relished a glass of choice old
wine in season as both

nourishing and bloodmaking and possessing aperient virtues (notably a
good burgundy which he was a staunch believer in) still never beyond
a certain point where he invariably drew the line as it simply led to
trouble all round to say nothing of your being at the tender mercy of
others practically. Most of all he commented adversely on the desertion
of Stephen by all his pubhunting _confreres_ but one, a most glaring
piece of ratting on the part of his brother medicos under all the circs.

--And that one was Judas, Stephen said, who up to then had said nothing
whatsoever of any kind.

Discussing these and kindred topics they made a beeline across the back
of the Customhouse and passed under the Loop Line bridge where a brazier
of coke burning in front of a sentrybox or something like one attracted
their rather lagging footsteps. Stephen of his own accord stopped for
no special reason to look at the heap of barren cobblestones and by
the light emanating from the brazier he could just make out the darker
figure of the corporation watchman inside the gloom of the sentrybox. He
began to remember that this had happened or had been mentioned as having
happened before but it cost him no small effort before he remembered
that he recognised in the sentry a quondam friend of his father's,
Gumley. To avoid a meeting he drew nearer to the pillars of the railway
bridge.

--Someone saluted you, Mr Bloom said.

A figure of middle height on the prowl evidently under the arches
saluted again, calling:

--_Night!_

Stephen of course started rather dizzily and stopped to return the
compliment. Mr Bloom actuated by motives of inherent delicacy inasmuch
as he always believed in minding his own business moved off but
nevertheless remained on the _qui vive_ with just a shade of anxiety
though not funkyish in the least. Though unusual in the Dublin area he
knew that it was not by any means unknown for desperadoes who had next
to nothing to live on to be abroad waylaying and generally terrorising
peaceable pedestrians by placing a pistol at their head in some
secluded spot outside the city proper, famished loiterers of the
Thames embankment category they might be hanging about there or simply
marauders ready to decamp with whatever boodle they could in one fell
swoop at a moment's notice, your money or your life, leaving you there
to point a moral, gagged and garrotted.

Stephen, that is when the accosting figure came to close quarters,
though he was not in an over sober state himself recognised Corley's
breath redolent of rotten cornjuice. Lord John Corley some called him
and his genealogy came about in this wise. He was the eldest son of
inspector Corley of the G division, lately deceased, who had married
a certain Katherine Brophy, the daughter of a Louth farmer. His
grandfather Patrick Michael Corley of New Ross had married the widow
of a publican there whose maiden name had been Katherine (also) Talbot.
Rumour had it (though not proved) that she descended from the house of
the lords Talbot de Malahide in whose mansion, really an unquestionably
fine residence of its kind and well worth seeing, her mother or aunt or
some relative, a woman, as the tale went, of extreme beauty, had enjoyed
the distinction of being in service in the washkitchen. This therefore
was the reason why the still comparatively young though dissolute
man who now addressed Stephen was spoken of by some with facetious
proclivities as Lord John Corley.

Taking Stephen on one side he had the customary doleful ditty to tell.
Not as much as a farthing to purchase a night's lodgings. His friends
had all deserted him. Furthermore he had a row with Lenehan and called
him to Stephen a mean bloody swab with a sprinkling of a number of other
uncalledfor expressions. He was out of a job and implored of Stephen to
tell him where on God's earth he could get something, anything at all,
to do. No, it was the daughter of the mother in the washkitchen that
was fostersister to the heir of the house or else they were connected
through the mother in some way, both occurrences happening at the same
time if the whole thing wasn't a complete fabrication from start to
finish. Anyhow he was all in.

--I wouldn't ask you only, pursued he, on my solemn oath and God knows
I'm on the rocks.

--There'll be a job tomorrow or next day, Stephen told him, in a boys'
school at Dalkey for a gentleman usher. Mr Garrett Deasy. Try it. You
may mention my name.

--Ah, God, Corley replied, sure I couldn't teach in a school, man. I was
never one of your bright ones, he added with a half laugh. I got stuck
twice in the junior at the christian brothers.

--I have no place to sleep myself, Stephen informed him.

Corley at the first go-off was inclined to suspect it was something to
do with Stephen being fired out of his digs for bringing in a bloody
tart off the street. There was a dosshouse in Marlborough street, Mrs
Maloney's, but it was only a tanner touch and full of undesirables but
M'Conachie told him you got a decent enough do in the Brazen Head over
in Winetavern street (which was distantly suggestive to the person
addressed of friar Bacon) for a bob. He was starving too though he
hadn't said a word about it.

Though this sort of thing went on every other night or very near it
still Stephen's feelings got the better of him in a sense though he knew
that Corley's brandnew rigmarole on a par with the others was hardly
deserving of much credence. However _haud ignarus malorum miseris
succurrere disco_ etcetera as the Latin poet remarks especially as luck
would have it he got paid his screw after every middle of the month on
the sixteenth which was the date of the month as a matter of fact though
a good bit of the wherewithal was demolished. But the cream of the joke
was nothing would get it out of Corley's head that he was living in
affluence and hadn't a thing to do but hand out the needful. Whereas.
He put his hand in a pocket anyhow not with the idea of finding any food
there but thinking he might lend him anything up to a bob or so in lieu
so that he might endeavour at all events and get sufficient to eat but
the result was in the negative for, to his chagrin, he found his cash
missing. A few broken biscuits were all the result of his investigation.
He tried his hardest to recollect for the moment whether he had lost
as well he might have or left because in that contingency it was not a
pleasant lookout, very much the reverse in fact. He was altogether too
fagged out to institute a thorough search though he tried to recollect.
About biscuits he dimly remembered. Who now exactly gave them he
wondered or where was or did he buy. However in another pocket he came
across what he surmised in the dark were pennies, erroneously however,
as it turned out.

--Those are halfcrowns, man, Corley corrected him.

And so in point of fact they turned out to be. Stephen anyhow lent him
one of them.

--Thanks, Corley answered, you're a gentleman. I'll pay you back one
time. Who's that with you? I saw him a few times in the Bleeding Horse
in Camden street with Boylan, the billsticker. You might put in a good
word for us to get me taken on there. I'd carry a sandwichboard only
the girl in the office told me they're full up for the next three weeks,
man. God, you've to book ahead, man, you'd think it was for the Carl
Rosa. I don't give a shite anyway so long as I get a job, even as a
crossing sweeper.

Subsequently being not quite so down in the mouth after the two and six
he got he informed Stephen about a fellow by the name of Bags Comisky
that he said Stephen knew well out of Fullam's, the shipchandler's,
bookkeeper there that used to be often round in Nagle's back with O'Mara
and a little chap with a stutter the name of Tighe. Anyhow he was lagged
the night before last and fined ten bob for a drunk and disorderly and
refusing to go with the constable.

210

Mr Bloom in the meanwhile kept dodging about in the vicinity of the
cobblestones near the brazier of coke in front of the corporation
watchman's sentrybox who evidently a glutton for work, it struck him,
was having a quiet forty winks for all intents and purposes on his own
private account while Dublin slept. He threw an odd eye at the same time
now and then at Stephen's anything but immaculately attired interlocutor
as if he had seen that nobleman somewhere or other though where he was
not in a position to truthfully state nor had he the remotest idea when.
Being a levelheaded individual who could give points to not a few in
point of shrewd observation he also remarked on his very dilapidated
hat and slouchy wearing apparel generally testifying to a chronic
impecuniosity. Palpably he was one of his hangerson but for the
matter of that it was merely a question of one preying on his nextdoor
neighbour all round, in every deep, so to put it, a deeper depth and for
the matter of that if the man in the street chanced to be in the dock
himself penal servitude with or without the option of a fine would be
a very rara avis altogether. In any case he had a consummate amount of
cool assurance intercepting people at that hour of the night or morning.
Pretty thick that was certainly.

The pair parted company and Stephen rejoined Mr Bloom who, with his
practised eye, was not without perceiving that he had succumbed to the
blandiloquence of the other parasite. Alluding to the encounter he said,
laughingly, Stephen, that is:

--He is down on his luck. He asked me to ask you to ask somebody named
Boylan, a billsticker, to give him a job as a sandwichman.

At this intelligence, in which he seemingly evinced little interest, Mr
Bloom gazed abstractedly for the space of a half a second or so in the
direction of a bucketdredger, rejoicing in the farfamed name of Eblana,
moored alongside Customhouse quay and quite possibly out of repair,
whereupon he observed evasively:

--Everybody gets their own ration of luck, they say. Now you mention it
his face was familiar to me. But, leaving that for the moment, how much
did you part with, he queried, if I am not too inquisitive?

--Half a crown, Stephen responded. I daresay he needs it to sleep
somewhere.

--Needs! Mr Bloom ejaculated, professing not the least surprise at
the intelligence, I can quite credit the assertion and I guarantee he
invariably does. Everyone according to his needs or everyone according
to his deeds. But, talking about things in general, where, added he with
a smile, will you sleep yourself? Walking to Sandycove is out of
the question. And even supposing you did you won't get in after what
occurred at Westland Row station. Simply fag out there for nothing. I
don't mean to presume to dictate to you in the slightest degree but why
did you leave your father's house?

--To seek misfortune, was Stephen's answer.

--I met your respected father on a recent occasion, Mr Bloom
diplomatically returned, today in fact, or to be strictly accurate, on
yesterday. Where does he live at present? I gathered in the course of
conversation that he had moved.

--I believe he is in Dublin somewhere, Stephen answered unconcernedly.
Why?

--A gifted man, Mr Bloom said of Mr Dedalus senior, in more respects
than one and a born _raconteur_ if ever there was one. He takes great
pride, quite legitimate, out of you. You could go back perhaps, he
hasarded, still thinking of the very unpleasant scene at Westland Row
terminus when it was perfectly evident that the other two, Mulligan,
that is, and that English tourist friend of his, who eventually euchred
their third companion, were patently trying as if the whole bally
station belonged to them to give Stephen the slip in the confusion,
which they did.

There was no response forthcoming to the suggestion however, such as it
was, Stephen's mind's eye being too busily engaged in repicturing his
family hearth the last time he saw it with his sister Dilly sitting by
the ingle, her hair hanging down, waiting for some weak Trinidad shell
cocoa that was in the sootcoated kettle to be done so that she and he
could drink it with the oatmealwater for milk after the Friday herrings
they had eaten at two a penny with an egg apiece for Maggy, Boody and
Katey, the cat meanwhile under the mangle devouring a mess of eggshells
and charred fish heads and bones on a square of brown paper, in
accordance with the third precept of the church to fast and abstain
on the days commanded, it being quarter tense or if not, ember days or
something like that.

--No, Mr Bloom repeated again, I wouldn't personally repose much trust
in that boon companion of yours who contributes the humorous element, Dr
Mulligan, as a guide, philosopher and friend if I were in your shoes. He
knows which side his bread is buttered on though in all probability he
never realised what it is to be without regular meals. Of course you
didn't notice as much as I did. But it wouldn't occasion me the least
surprise to learn that a pinch of tobacco or some narcotic was put in
your drink for some ulterior object.

He understood however from all he heard that Dr Mulligan was a versatile
allround man, by no means confined to medicine only, who was rapidly
coming to the fore in his line and, if the report was verified, bade
fair to enjoy a flourishing practice in the not too distant future as
a tony medical practitioner drawing a handsome fee for his services
in addition to which professional status his rescue of that man from
certain drowning by artificial respiration and what they call first
aid at Skerries, or Malahide was it?, was, he was bound to admit, an
exceedingly plucky deed which he could not too highly praise, so that
frankly he was utterly at a loss to fathom what earthly reason could be
at the back of it except he put it down to sheer cussedness or jealousy,
pure and simple.

--Except it simply amounts to one thing and he is what they call picking
your brains, he ventured to throw out.

The guarded glance of half solicitude half curiosity augmented by
friendliness which he gave at Stephen's at present morose expression
of features did not throw a flood of light, none at all in fact on the
problem as to whether he had let himself be badly bamboozled to judge by
two or three lowspirited remarks he let drop or the other way about saw
through the affair and for some reason or other best known to himself
allowed matters to more or less. Grinding poverty did have that effect
and he more than conjectured that, high educational abilities though he
possessed, he experienced no little difficulty in making both ends meet.

Adjacent to the men's public urinal they perceived an icecream car round
which a group of presumably Italians in heated altercation were getting
rid of voluble expressions in their vivacious language in a particularly
animated way, there being some little differences between the parties.

--_Puttana madonna, che ci dia i quattrini! Ho ragione? Culo rotto!_

_--Intendiamoci. Mezzo sovrano piu..._

_--Dice lui, pero!_

_--Mezzo._

_--Farabutto! Mortacci sui!_

_--Ma ascolta! Cinque la testa piu..._

Mr Bloom and Stephen entered the cabman's shelter, an unpretentious
wooden structure, where, prior to then, he had rarely if ever been
before, the former having previously whispered to the latter a few
hints anent the keeper of it said to be the once famous Skin-the-Goat
Fitzharris, the invincible, though he could not vouch for the actual
facts which quite possibly there was not one vestige of truth in. A few
moments later saw our two noctambules safely seated in a discreet corner
only to be greeted by stares from the decidedly miscellaneous collection
of waifs and strays and other nondescript specimens of the genus _homo_
already there engaged in eating and drinking diversified by conversation
for whom they seemingly formed an object of marked curiosity.

--Now touching a cup of coffee, Mr Bloom ventured to plausibly suggest
to break the ice, it occurs to me you ought to sample something in the
shape of solid food, say, a roll of some description.

Accordingly his first act was with characteristic _sangfroid_ to order
these commodities quietly. The _hoi polloi_ of jarvies or stevedores
or whatever they were after a cursory examination turned their eyes
apparently dissatisfied, away though one redbearded bibulous individual
portion of whose hair was greyish, a sailor probably, still stared for
some appreciable time before transferring his rapt attention to the
floor. Mr Bloom, availing himself of the right of free speech, he having
just a bowing acquaintance with the language in dispute, though, to be
sure, rather in a quandary over _voglio_, remarked to his _protÃ©gÃ©_ in
an audible tone of voice _a propos_ of the battle royal in the street
which was still raging fast and furious:

--A beautiful language. I mean for singing purposes. Why do you not
write your poetry in that language? _Bella Poetria_! It is so melodious
and full. _Belladonna. Voglio._

Stephen, who was trying his dead best to yawn if he could, suffering
from lassitude generally, replied:

--To fill the ear of a cow elephant. They were haggling over money.

--Is that so? Mr Bloom asked. Of course, he subjoined pensively, at the
inward reflection of there being more languages to start with than were
absolutely necessary, it may be only the southern glamour that surrounds
it.

The keeper of the shelter in the middle of this _tÃªte-Ã¢-tÃªte_ put a
boiling swimming cup of a choice concoction labelled coffee on the table
and a rather antediluvian specimen of a bun, or so it seemed. After
which he beat a retreat to his counter, Mr Bloom determining to have
a good square look at him later on so as not to appear to. For which
reason he encouraged Stephen to proceed with his eyes while he did
the honours by surreptitiously pushing the cup of what was temporarily
supposed to be called coffee gradually nearer him.

--Sounds are impostures, Stephen said after a pause of some little time,
like names. Cicero, Podmore. Napoleon, Mr Goodbody. Jesus, Mr Doyle.
Shakespeares were as common as Murphies. What's in a name?

--Yes, to be sure, Mr Bloom unaffectedly concurred. Of course. Our name
was changed too, he added, pushing the socalled roll across.

The redbearded sailor who had his weather eye on the newcomers boarded
Stephen, whom he had singled out for attention in particular, squarely
by asking:

--And what might your name be?

Just in the nick of time Mr Bloom touched his companion's boot but
Stephen, apparently disregarding the warm pressure from an unexpected
quarter, answered:

--Dedalus.

The sailor stared at him heavily from a pair of drowsy baggy eyes,
rather bunged up from excessive use of boose, preferably good old
Hollands and water.

--You know Simon Dedalus? he asked at length.

--I've heard of him, Stephen said.

Mr Bloom was all at sea for a moment, seeing the others evidently
eavesdropping too.

--He's Irish, the seaman bold affirmed, staring still in much the same
way and nodding. All Irish.

--All too Irish, Stephen rejoined.

As for Mr Bloom he could neither make head or tail of the whole business
and he was just asking himself what possible connection when the sailor
of his own accord turned to the other occupants of the shelter with the
remark:

--I seen him shoot two eggs off two bottles at fifty yards over his
shoulder. The lefthand dead shot.

Though he was slightly hampered by an occasional stammer and his
gestures being also clumsy as it was still he did his best to explain.

--Bottles out there, say. Fifty yards measured. Eggs on the bottles.
Cocks his gun over his shoulder. Aims.

He turned his body half round, shut up his right eye completely. Then he
screwed his features up someway sideways and glared out into the night
with an unprepossessing cast of countenance.

--Pom! he then shouted once.

The entire audience waited, anticipating an additional detonation, there
being still a further egg.

--Pom! he shouted twice.

Egg two evidently demolished, he nodded and winked, adding
bloodthirstily:

_--Buffalo Bill shoots to kill, Never missed nor he never will._

A silence ensued till Mr Bloom for agreeableness' sake just felt like
asking him whether it was for a marksmanship competition like the
Bisley.

--Beg pardon, the sailor said.

--Long ago? Mr Bloom pursued without flinching a hairsbreadth.

--Why, the sailor replied, relaxing to a certain extent under the magic
influence of diamond cut diamond, it might be a matter of ten years. He
toured the wide world with Hengler's Royal Circus. I seen him do that in
Stockholm.

--Curious coincidence, Mr Bloom confided to Stephen unobtrusively.

--Murphy's my name, the sailor continued. D. B. Murphy of Carrigaloe.
Know where that is?

--Queenstown harbour, Stephen replied.

--That's right, the sailor said. Fort Camden and Fort Carlisle. That's
where I hails from. I belongs there. That's where I hails from. My
little woman's down there. She's waiting for me, I know. _For England,
home and beauty_. She's my own true wife I haven't seen for seven years
now, sailing about.

Mr Bloom could easily picture his advent on this scene, the homecoming
to the mariner's roadside shieling after having diddled Davy Jones,
a rainy night with a blind moon. Across the world for a wife. Quite a
number of stories there were on that particular Alice Ben Bolt topic,
Enoch Arden and Rip van Winkle and does anybody hereabouts remember Caoc
O'Leary, a favourite and most trying declamation piece by the way of
poor John Casey and a bit of perfect poetry in its own small way.
Never about the runaway wife coming back, however much devoted to the
absentee. The face at the window! Judge of his astonishment when he
finally did breast the tape and the awful truth dawned upon him anent
his better half, wrecked in his affections. You little expected me but
I've come to stay and make a fresh start. There she sits, a grasswidow,
at the selfsame fireside. Believes me dead, rocked in the cradle of the
deep. And there sits uncle Chubb or Tomkin, as the case might be, the
publican of the Crown and Anchor, in shirtsleeves, eating rumpsteak and
onions. No chair for father. Broo! The wind! Her brandnew arrival is on
her knee, _post mortem_ child. With a high ro! and a randy ro! and my
galloping tearing tandy, O! Bow to the inevitable. Grin and bear it. I
remain with much love your brokenhearted husband D B Murphy.

The sailor, who scarcely seemed to be a Dublin resident, turned to one
of the jarvies with the request:

--You don't happen to have such a thing as a spare chaw about you?

The jarvey addressed as it happened had not but the keeper took a die of
plug from his good jacket hanging on a nail and the desired object was
passed from hand to hand.

--Thank you, the sailor said.

He deposited the quid in his gob and, chewing and with some slow
stammers, proceeded:

--We come up this morning eleven o'clock. The threemaster _Rosevean_
from Bridgwater with bricks. I shipped to get over. Paid off this
afternoon. There's my discharge. See? D. B. Murphy. A. B. S.

In confirmation of which statement he extricated from an inside pocket
and handed to his neighbour a not very cleanlooking folded document.

--You must have seen a fair share of the world, the keeper remarked,
leaning on the counter.

--Why, the sailor answered upon reflection upon it, I've circumnavigated
a bit since I first joined on. I was in the Red Sea. I was in China and
North America and South America. We was chased by pirates one voyage.
I seen icebergs plenty, growlers. I was in Stockholm and the Black Sea,
the Dardanelles under Captain Dalton, the best bloody man that ever
scuttled a ship. I seen Russia. _Gospodi pomilyou_. That's how the
Russians prays.

--You seen queer sights, don't be talking, put in a jarvey.

--Why, the sailor said, shifting his partially chewed plug. I seen
queer things too, ups and downs. I seen a crocodile bite the fluke of an
anchor same as I chew that quid.

He took out of his mouth the pulpy quid and, lodging it between his
teeth, bit ferociously:

--Khaan! Like that. And I seen maneaters in Peru that eats corpses and
the livers of horses. Look here. Here they are. A friend of mine sent
me.

He fumbled out a picture postcard from his inside pocket which seemed to
be in its way a species of repository and pushed it along the table. The
printed matter on it stated: _Choza de Indios. Beni, Bolivia._

All focussed their attention at the scene exhibited, a group of savage
women in striped loincloths, squatted, blinking, suckling, frowning,
sleeping amid a swarm of infants (there must have been quite a score of
them) outside some primitive shanties of osier.

--Chews coca all day, the communicative tarpaulin added. Stomachs
like breadgraters. Cuts off their diddies when they can't bear no more
children.

See them sitting there stark ballocknaked eating a dead horse's liver
raw.

His postcard proved a centre of attraction for Messrs the greenhorns for
several minutes if not more.

--Know how to keep them off? he inquired generally.

Nobody volunteering a statement he winked, saying:

--Glass. That boggles 'em. Glass.

Mr Bloom, without evincing surprise, unostentatiously turned over the
card to peruse the partially obliterated address and postmark. It ran
as follows: _Tarjeta Postal, SeÃ±or A Boudin, Galeria Becche, Santiago,
Chile._ There was no message evidently, as he took particular notice.
Though not an implicit believer in the lurid story narrated (or the
eggsniping transaction for that matter despite William Tell and the
Lazarillo-Don Cesar de Bazan incident depicted in _Maritana_ on which
occasion the former's ball passed through the latter's hat) having
detected a discrepancy between his name (assuming he was the person
he represented himself to be and not sailing under false colours
after having boxed the compass on the strict q.t. somewhere) and
the fictitious addressee of the missive which made him nourish some
suspicions of our friend's _bona fides_ nevertheless it reminded him in
a way of a longcherished plan he meant to one day realise some Wednesday
or Saturday of travelling to London via long sea not to say that he had
ever travelled extensively to any great extent but he was at heart a
born adventurer though by a trick of fate he had consistently remained
a landlubber except you call going to Holyhead which was his longest.
Martin Cunningham frequently said he would work a pass through Egan but
some deuced hitch or other eternally cropped up with the net result that
the scheme fell through. But even suppose it did come to planking
down the needful and breaking Boyd's heart it was not so dear, purse
permitting, a few guineas at the outside considering the fare to
Mullingar where he figured on going was five and six, there and back.
The trip would benefit health on account of the bracing ozone and be in
every way thoroughly pleasurable, especially for a chap whose liver was
out of order, seeing the different places along the route, Plymouth,
Falmouth, Southampton and so on culminating in an instructive tour of
the sights of the great metropolis, the spectacle of our modern Babylon
where doubtless he would see the greatest improvement, tower, abbey,
wealth of Park lane to renew acquaintance with. Another thing just
struck him as a by no means bad notion was he might have a gaze around
on the spot to see about trying to make arrangements about a concert
tour of summer music embracing the most prominent pleasure resorts,
Margate with mixed bathing and firstrate hydros and spas, Eastbourne,
Scarborough, Margate and so on, beautiful Bournemouth, the Channel
islands and similar bijou spots, which might prove highly remunerative.
Not, of course, with a hole and corner scratch company or local ladies
on the job, witness Mrs C P M'Coy type lend me your valise and I'll post
you the ticket. No, something top notch, an all star Irish caste, the
Tweedy-Flower grand opera company with his own legal consort as leading
lady as a sort of counterblast to the Elster Grimes and Moody-Manners,
perfectly simple matter and he was quite sanguine of success, providing
puffs in the local papers could be managed by some fellow with a bit of
bounce who could pull the indispensable wires and thus combine business
with pleasure. But who? That was the rub. Also, without being actually
positive, it struck him a great field was to be opened up in the line
of opening up new routes to keep pace with the times _apropos_ of the
Fishguard-Rosslare route which, it was mooted, was once more on the
_tapis_ in the circumlocution departments with the usual quantity of red
tape and dillydallying of effete fogeydom and dunderheads generally. A
great opportunity there certainly was for push and enterprise to meet
the travelling needs of the public at large, the average man, i.e.
Brown, Robinson and Co.

It was a subject of regret and absurd as well on the face of it and no
small blame to our vaunted society that the man in the street, when the
system really needed toning up, for the matter of a couple of paltry
pounds was debarred from seeing more of the world they lived in instead
of being always and ever cooped up since my old stick-in-the-mud took me
for a wife. After all, hang it, they had their eleven and more humdrum
months of it and merited a radical change of _venue_ after the grind
of city life in the summertime for choice when dame Nature is at her
spectacular best constituting nothing short of a new lease of life.
There were equally excellent opportunities for vacationists in the home
island, delightful sylvan spots for rejuvenation, offering a plethora
of attractions as well as a bracing tonic for the system in and around
Dublin and its picturesque environs even, Poulaphouca to which there was
a steamtram, but also farther away from the madding crowd in Wicklow,
rightly termed the garden of Ireland, an ideal neighbourhood for elderly
wheelmen so long as it didn't come down, and in the wilds of Donegal
where if report spoke true the _coup d'oeil_ was exceedingly grand
though the lastnamed locality was not easily getatable so that the
influx of visitors was not as yet all that it might be considering the
signal benefits to be derived from it while Howth with its historic
associations and otherwise, Silken Thomas, Grace O'Malley, George IV,
rhododendrons several hundred feet above sealevel was a favourite haunt
with all sorts and conditions of men especially in the spring when young
men's fancy, though it had its own toll of deaths by falling off the
cliffs by design or accidentally, usually, by the way, on their left
leg, it being only about three quarters of an hour's run from the
pillar. Because of course uptodate tourist travelling was as yet merely
in its infancy, so to speak, and the accommodation left much to be
desired. Interesting to fathom it seemed to him from a motive of
curiosity, pure and simple, was whether it was the traffic that created
the route or viceversa or the two sides in fact. He turned back the
other side of the card, picture, and passed it along to Stephen.

--I seen a Chinese one time, related the doughty narrator, that had
little pills like putty and he put them in the water and they opened and
every pill was something different. One was a ship, another was a house,
another was a flower. Cooks rats in your soup, he appetisingly added,
the chinks does.

Possibly perceiving an expression of dubiosity on their faces the
globetrotter went on, adhering to his adventures.

--And I seen a man killed in Trieste by an Italian chap. Knife in his
back. Knife like that.

Whilst speaking he produced a dangerouslooking claspknife quite in
keeping with his character and held it in the striking position.

--In a knockingshop it was count of a tryon between two smugglers.
Fellow hid behind a door, come up behind him. Like that. _Prepare to
meet your God_, says he. Chuk! It went into his back up to the butt.

His heavy glance drowsily roaming about kind of defied their further
questions even should they by any chance want to.

--That's a good bit of steel, repeated he, examining his formidable
_stiletto_.

After which harrowing _denouement_ sufficient to appal the stoutest he
snapped the blade to and stowed the weapon in question away as before in
his chamber of horrors, otherwise pocket.

--They're great for the cold steel, somebody who was evidently quite in
the dark said for the benefit of them all. That was why they thought
the park murders of the invincibles was done by foreigners on account of
them using knives.

At this remark passed obviously in the spirit of _where ignorance
is bliss_ Mr B. and Stephen, each in his own particular way, both
instinctively exchanged meaning glances, in a religious silence of the
strictly _entre nous_ variety however, towards where Skin-the-Goat,
_alias_ the keeper, not turning a hair, was drawing spurts of liquid
from his boiler affair. His inscrutable face which was really a work
of art, a perfect study in itself, beggaring description, conveyed
the impression that he didn't understand one jot of what was going on.
Funny, very!

There ensued a somewhat lengthy pause. One man was reading in fits and
starts a stained by coffee evening journal, another the card with the
natives _choza de_, another the seaman's discharge. Mr Bloom, so far
as he was personally concerned, was just pondering in pensive mood. He
vividly recollected when the occurrence alluded to took place as well
as yesterday, roughly some score of years previously in the days of the
land troubles, when it took the civilised world by storm, figuratively
speaking, early in the eighties, eightyone to be correct, when he was
just turned fifteen.

--Ay, boss, the sailor broke in. Give us back them papers.

The request being complied with he clawed them up with a scrape.

--Have you seen the rock of Gibraltar? Mr Bloom inquired.

The sailor grimaced, chewing, in a way that might be read as yes, ay or
no.

--Ah, you've touched there too, Mr Bloom said, Europa point, thinking he
had, in the hope that the rover might possibly by some reminiscences but
he failed to do so, simply letting spirt a jet of spew into the sawdust,
and shook his head with a sort of lazy scorn.

--What year would that be about? Mr B interrogated. Can you recall the
boats?

Our _soi-disant_ sailor munched heavily awhile hungrily before
answering:

--I'm tired of all them rocks in the sea, he said, and boats and ships.
Salt junk all the time.

Tired seemingly, he ceased. His questioner perceiving that he was not
likely to get a great deal of change out of such a wily old customer,
fell to woolgathering on the enormous dimensions of the water about the
globe, suffice it to say that, as a casual glance at the map revealed,
it covered fully three fourths of it and he fully realised accordingly
what it meant to rule the waves. On more than one occasion, a dozen
at the lowest, near the North Bull at Dollymount he had remarked a
superannuated old salt, evidently derelict, seated habitually near the
not particularly redolent sea on the wall, staring quite obliviously at
it and it at him, dreaming of fresh woods and pastures new as someone
somewhere sings. And it left him wondering why. Possibly he had tried to
find out the secret for himself, floundering up and down the antipodes
and all that sort of thing and over and under, well, not exactly under,
tempting the fates. And the odds were twenty to nil there was really no
secret about it at all. Nevertheless, without going into the _minutiae_
of the business, the eloquent fact remained that the sea was there in
all its glory and in the natural course of things somebody or other had
to sail on it and fly in the face of providence though it merely went
to show how people usually contrived to load that sort of onus on to the
other fellow like the hell idea and the lottery and insurance which were
run on identically the same lines so that for that very reason if no
other lifeboat Sunday was a highly laudable institution to which the
public at large, no matter where living inland or seaside, as the case
might be, having it brought home to them like that should extend its
gratitude also to the harbourmasters and coastguard service who had
to man the rigging and push off and out amid the elements whatever the
season when duty called _Ireland expects that every man_ and so on and
sometimes had a terrible time of it in the wintertime not forgetting the
Irish lights, Kish and others, liable to capsize at any moment, rounding
which he once with his daughter had experienced some remarkably choppy,
not to say stormy, weather.

--There was a fellow sailed with me in the Rover, the old seadog,
himself a rover, proceeded, went ashore and took up a soft job as
gentleman's valet at six quid a month. Them are his trousers I've on
me and he gave me an oilskin and that jackknife. I'm game for that job,
shaving and brushup. I hate roaming about. There's my son now, Danny,
run off to sea and his mother got him took in a draper's in Cork where
he could be drawing easy money.

--What age is he? queried one hearer who, by the way, seen from the
side, bore a distant resemblance to Henry Campbell, the townclerk, away
from the carking cares of office, unwashed of course and in a seedy
getup and a strong suspicion of nosepaint about the nasal appendage.

--Why, the sailor answered with a slow puzzled utterance, my son, Danny?
He'd be about eighteen now, way I figure it.

The Skibbereen father hereupon tore open his grey or unclean anyhow
shirt with his two hands and scratched away at his chest on which was to
be seen an image tattooed in blue Chinese ink intended to represent an
anchor.

--There was lice in that bunk in Bridgwater, he remarked, sure as nuts.
I must get a wash tomorrow or next day. It's them black lads I objects
to. I hate those buggers. Suck your blood dry, they does.

Seeing they were all looking at his chest he accommodatingly dragged
his shirt more open so that on top of the timehonoured symbol of the
mariner's hope and rest they had a full view of the figure 16 and a
young man's sideface looking frowningly rather.

--Tattoo, the exhibitor explained. That was done when we were Iying
becalmed off Odessa in the Black Sea under Captain Dalton. Fellow, the
name of Antonio, done that. There he is himself, a Greek.

--Did it hurt much doing it? one asked the sailor.

That worthy, however, was busily engaged in collecting round the.
Someway in his. Squeezing or.

--See here, he said, showing Antonio. There he is cursing the mate. And
there he is now, he added, the same fellow, pulling the skin with his
fingers, some special knack evidently, and he laughing at a yarn.

And in point of fact the young man named Antonio's livid face did
actually look like forced smiling and the curious effect excited the
unreserved admiration of everybody including Skin-the-Goat, who this
time stretched over.

--Ay, ay, sighed the sailor, looking down on his manly chest. He's gone
too. Ate by sharks after. Ay, ay.

He let go of the skin so that the profile resumed the normal expression
of before.

--Neat bit of work, one longshoreman said.

--And what's the number for? loafer number two queried.

--Eaten alive? a third asked the sailor.

--Ay, ay, sighed again the latter personage, more cheerily this
time with some sort of a half smile for a brief duration only in the
direction of the questioner about the number. Ate. A Greek he was.

And then he added with rather gallowsbird humour considering his alleged
end:

_--As bad as old Antonio, For he left me on my ownio._

The face of a streetwalker glazed and haggard under a black straw hat
peered askew round the door of the shelter palpably reconnoitring on
her own with the object of bringing more grist to her mill. Mr
Bloom, scarcely knowing which way to look, turned away on the moment
flusterfied but outwardly calm, and, picking up from the table the pink
sheet of the Abbey street organ which the jarvey, if such he was, had
laid aside, he picked it up and looked at the pink of the paper though
why pink. His reason for so doing was he recognised on the moment
round the door the same face he had caught a fleeting glimpse of that
afternoon on Ormond quay, the partially idiotic female, namely, of the
lane who knew the lady in the brown costume does be with you (Mrs B.)
and begged the chance of his washing. Also why washing which seemed
rather vague than not, your washing. Still candour compelled him to
admit he had washed his wife's undergarments when soiled in Holles
street and women would and did too a man's similar garments initialled
with Bewley and Draper's marking ink (hers were, that is) if they really
loved him, that is to say, love me, love my dirty shirt. Still just
then, being on tenterhooks, he desired the female's room more than her
company so it came as a genuine relief when the keeper made her a rude
sign to take herself off. Round the side of the Evening Telegraph he
just caught a fleeting glimpse of her face round the side of the door
with a kind of demented glassy grin showing that she was not exactly all
there, viewing with evident amusement the group of gazers round skipper
Murphy's nautical chest and then there was no more of her.

--The gunboat, the keeper said.

--It beats me, Mr Bloom confided to Stephen, medically I am speaking,
how a wretched creature like that from the Lock hospital reeking with
disease can be barefaced enough to solicit or how any man in his sober
senses, if he values his health in the least. Unfortunate creature! Of
course I suppose some man is ultimately responsible for her condition.
Still no matter what the cause is from...

Stephen had not noticed her and shrugged his shoulders, merely
remarking:

--In this country people sell much more than she ever had and do a
roaring trade. Fear not them that sell the body but have not power to
buy the soul. She is a bad merchant. She buys dear and sells cheap.

The elder man, though not by any manner of means an old maid or a prude,
said it was nothing short of a crying scandal that ought to be put a
stop to _instanter_ to say that women of that stamp (quite apart from
any oldmaidish squeamishness on the subject), a necessary evil, w ere
not licensed and medically inspected by the proper authorities, a thing,
he could truthfully state, he, as a _paterfamilias_, was a stalwart
advocate of from the very first start. Whoever embarked on a policy of
the sort, he said, and ventilated the matter thoroughly would confer a
lasting boon on everybody concerned.

--You as a good catholic, he observed, talking of body and soul, believe
in the soul. Or do you mean the intelligence, the brainpower as such,
as distinct from any outside object, the table, let us say, that cup. I
believe in that myself because it has been explained by competent men as
the convolutions of the grey matter. Otherwise we would never have such
inventions as X rays, for instance. Do you?

Thus cornered, Stephen had to make a superhuman effort of memory to try
and concentrate and remember before he could say:

--They tell me on the best authority it is a simple substance and
therefore incorruptible. It would be immortal, I understand, but for the
possibility of its annihilation by its First Cause Who, from all I
can hear, is quite capable of adding that to the number of His other
practical jokes, _corruptio per se_ and _corruptio per accidens_ both
being excluded by court etiquette.

Mr Bloom thoroughly acquiesced in the general gist of this though the
mystical finesse involved was a bit out of his sublunary depth still
he felt bound to enter a demurrer on the head of simple, promptly
rejoining:

--Simple? I shouldn't think that is the proper word. Of course, I grant
you, to concede a point, you do knock across a simple soul once in a
blue moon. But what I am anxious to arrive at is it is one thing for
instance to invent those rays Rontgen did or the telescope like Edison,
though I believe it was before his time Galileo was the man, I mean,
and the same applies to the laws, for example, of a farreaching natural
phenomenon such as electricity but it's a horse of quite another colour
to say you believe in the existence of a supernatural God.

--O that, Stephen expostulated, has been proved conclusively by several
of the bestknown passages in Holy Writ, apart from circumstantial
evidence.

On this knotty point however the views of the pair, poles apart as they
were both in schooling and everything else with the marked difference in
their respective ages, clashed.

--Has been? the more experienced of the two objected, sticking to his
original point with a smile of unbelief. I'm not so sure about that.
That's a matter for everyman's opinion and, without dragging in the
sectarian side of the business, I beg to differ with you _in toto_
there. My belief is, to tell you the candid truth, that those bits were
genuine forgeries all of them put in by monks most probably or it's the
big question of our national poet over again, who precisely wrote them
like _Hamlet_ and Bacon, as, you who know your Shakespeare infinitely
better than I, of course I needn't tell you. Can't you drink that
coffee, by the way? Let me stir it. And take a piece of that bun. It's
like one of our skipper's bricks disguised. Still no-one can give what
he hasn't got. Try a bit.

--Couldn't, Stephen contrived to get out, his mental organs for the
moment refusing to dictate further.

Faultfinding being a proverbially bad hat Mr Bloom thought well to stir
or try to the clotted sugar from the bottom and reflected with something
approaching acrimony on the Coffee Palace and its temperance (and
lucrative) work. To be sure it was a legitimate object and beyond yea or
nay did a world of good, shelters such as the present one they were in
run on teetotal lines for vagrants at night, concerts, dramatic evenings
and useful lectures (admittance free) by qualified men for the lower
orders. On the other hand he had a distinct and painful recollection
they paid his wife, Madam Marion Tweedy who had been prominently
associated with it at one time, a very modest remuneration indeed for
her pianoplaying. The idea, he was strongly inclined to believe, was
to do good and net a profit, there being no competition to speak
of. Sulphate of copper poison SO4 or something in some dried peas he
remembered reading of in a cheap eatinghouse somewhere but he couldn't
remember when it was or where. Anyhow inspection, medical inspection,
of all eatables seemed to him more than ever necessary which possibly
accounted for the vogue of Dr Tibble's Vi-Cocoa on account of the
medical analysis involved.

--Have a shot at it now, he ventured to say of the coffee after being
stirred.

Thus prevailed on to at any rate taste it Stephen lifted the heavy mug
from the brown puddle it clopped out of when taken up by the handle and
took a sip of the offending beverage.

--Still it's solid food, his good genius urged, I'm a stickler for solid
food, his one and only reason being not gormandising in the least but
regular meals as the _sine qua non_ for any kind of proper work, mental
or manual. You ought to eat more solid food. You would feel a different
man.

--Liquids I can eat, Stephen said. But O, oblige me by taking away that
knife. I can't look at the point of it. It reminds me of Roman history.

Mr Bloom promptly did as suggested and removed the incriminated article,
a blunt hornhandled ordinary knife with nothing particularly Roman or
antique about it to the lay eye, observing that the point was the least
conspicuous point about it.

--Our mutual friend's stories are like himself, Mr Bloom _apropos_ of
knives remarked to his _confidante sotto voce_. Do you think they are
genuine? He could spin those yarns for hours on end all night long and
lie like old boots. Look at him.

Yet still though his eyes were thick with sleep and sea air life was
full of a host of things and coincidences of a terrible nature and it
was quite within the bounds of possibility that it was not an
entire fabrication though at first blush there was not much inherent
probability in all the spoof he got off his chest being strictly
accurate gospel.

He had been meantime taking stock of the individual in front of him and
Sherlockholmesing him up ever since he clapped eyes on him. Though a
wellpreserved man of no little stamina, if a trifle prone to baldness,
there was something spurious in the cut of his jib that suggested a jail
delivery and it required no violent stretch of imagination to associate
such a weirdlooking specimen with the oakum and treadmill fraternity. He
might even have done for his man supposing it was his own case he told,
as people often did about others, namely, that he killed him himself
and had served his four or five goodlooking years in durance vile to say
nothing of the Antonio personage (no relation to the dramatic personage
of identical name who sprang from the pen of our national poet) who
expiated his crimes in the melodramatic manner above described. On the
other hand he might be only bluffing, a pardonable weakness because
meeting unmistakable mugs, Dublin residents, like those jarvies waiting
news from abroad would tempt any ancient mariner who sailed the ocean
seas to draw the long bow about the schooner _Hesperus_ and etcetera.
And when all was said and done the lies a fellow told about himself
couldn't probably hold a proverbial candle to the wholesale whoppers
other fellows coined about him.

--Mind you, I'm not saying that it's all a pure invention, he resumed.
Analogous scenes are occasionally, if not often, met with. Giants,
though that is rather a far cry, you see once in a way, Marcella the
midget queen. In those waxworks in Henry street I myself saw some
Aztecs, as they are called, sitting bowlegged, they couldn't straighten
their legs if you paid them because the muscles here, you see, he
proceeded, indicating on his companion the brief outline of the sinews
or whatever you like to call them behind the right knee, were utterly
powerless from sitting that way so long cramped up, being adored as
gods. There's an example again of simple souls.

However reverting to friend Sinbad and his horrifying adventures (who
reminded him a bit of Ludwig, _alias_ Ledwidge, when he occupied
the boards of the Gaiety when Michael Gunn was identified with the
management in the _Flying Dutchman_, a stupendous success, and his host
of admirers came in large numbers, everyone simply flocking to hear him
though ships of any sort, phantom or the reverse, on the stage usually
fell a bit flat as also did trains) there was nothing intrinsically
incompatible about it, he conceded. On the contrary that stab in the
back touch was quite in keeping with those italianos though candidly he
was none the less free to admit those icecreamers and friers in the fish
way not to mention the chip potato variety and so forth over in little
Italy there near the Coombe were sober thrifty hardworking fellows
except perhaps a bit too given to pothunting the harmless necessary
animal of the feline persuasion of others at night so as to have a good
old succulent tuckin with garlic _de rigueur_ off him or her next day on
the quiet and, he added, on the cheap.

--Spaniards, for instance, he continued, passionate temperaments like
that, impetuous as Old Nick, are given to taking the law into their own
hands and give you your quietus doublequick with those poignards they
carry in the abdomen. It comes from the great heat, climate generally.
My wife is, so to speak, Spanish, half that is. Point of fact she could
actually claim Spanish nationality if she wanted, having been born in
(technically) Spain, i.e. Gibraltar. She has the Spanish type. Quite
dark, regular brunette, black. I for one certainly believe climate
accounts for character. That's why I asked you if you wrote your poetry
in Italian.

--The temperaments at the door, Stephen interposed with, were very
passionate about ten shillings. _Roberto ruba roba sua_.

--Quite so, Mr Bloom dittoed.

--Then, Stephen said staring and rambling on to himself or some unknown
listener somewhere, we have the impetuosity of Dante and the isosceles
triangle miss Portinari he fell in love with and Leonardo and san
Tommaso Mastino.

--It's in the blood, Mr Bloom acceded at once. All are washed in the
blood of the sun. Coincidence I just happened to be in the Kildare
street museum 890 today, shortly prior to our meeting if I can so call
it, and I was just looking at those antique statues there. The splendid
proportions of hips, bosom. You simply don't knock against those kind of
women here. An exception here and there. Handsome yes, pretty in a way
you find but what I'm talking about is the female form. Besides they
have so little taste in dress, most of them, which greatly enhances a
woman's natural beauty, no matter what you say. Rumpled stockings, it
may be, possibly is, a foible of mine but still it's a thing I simply
hate to see.

Interest, however, was starting to flag somewhat all round and then the
others got on to talking about accidents at sea, ships lost in a fog,
goo collisions with icebergs, all that sort of thing. Shipahoy of course
had his own say to say. He had doubled the cape a few odd times and
weathered a monsoon, a kind of wind, in the China seas and through all
those perils of the deep there was one thing, he declared, stood to him
or words to that effect, a pious medal he had that saved him.

So then after that they drifted on to the wreck off Daunt's rock, wreck
of that illfated Norwegian barque nobody could think of her name for
the moment till the jarvey who had really quite a look of Henry Campbell
remembered it _Palme_ on Booterstown strand. That was the talk of the
town that year (Albert William Quill wrote a fine piece of original
verse of 910 distinctive merit on the topic for the Irish _Times_),
breakers running over her and crowds and crowds on the shore in
commotion petrified with horror. Then someone said something about the
case of the s. s. _Lady Cairns_ of Swansea run into by the _Mona_ which
was on an opposite tack in rather muggyish weather and lost with all
hands on deck. No aid was given. Her master, the _Mona's_, said he
was afraid his collision bulkhead would give way. She had no water, it
appears, in her hold.

At this stage an incident happened. It having become necessary for him
to unfurl a reef the sailor vacated his seat.

--Let me cross your bows mate, he said to his neighbour who was just
gently dropping off into a peaceful doze.

He made tracks heavily, slowly with a dumpy sort of a gait to the door,
stepped heavily down the one step there was out of the shelter and bore
due left. While he was in the act of getting his bearings Mr Bloom who
noticed when he stood up that he had two flasks of presumably ship's
rum sticking one out of each pocket for the private consumption of his
burning interior, saw him produce a bottle and uncork it or unscrew and,
applying its nozz1e to his lips, take a good old delectable swig out of
it with a gurgling noise. The irrepressible Bloom, who also had a
shrewd suspicion that the old stager went out on a manoeuvre after the
counterattraction in the shape of a female who however had disappeared
to all intents and purposes, could by straining just perceive him, when
duly refreshed by his rum puncheon exploit, gaping up at the piers and
girders of the Loop line rather out of his depth as of course it was all
radically altered since his last visit and greatly improved. Some person
or persons invisible directed him to the male urinal erected by the
cleansing committee all over the place for the purpose but after a brief
space of time during which silence reigned supreme the sailor, evidently
giving it a wide berth, eased himself closer at hand, the noise of his
bilgewater some little time subsequently splashing on the ground where
it apparently awoke a horse of the cabrank. A hoof scooped anyway for
new foothold after sleep and harness jingled. Slightly disturbed in his
sentrybox by the brazier of live coke the watcher of the corporation
stones who, though now broken down and fast breaking up, was none other
in stern reality than the Gumley aforesaid, now practically on the
parish rates, given the temporary job by Pat Tobin in all human
probability from dictates of humanity knowing him before shifted about
and shuffled in his box before composing his limbs again in to the arms
of Morpheus, a truly amazing piece of hard lines in its most virulent
form on a fellow most respectably connected and familiarised with decent
home comforts all his life who came in for a cool 100 pounds a year
at one time which of course the doublebarrelled ass proceeded to make
general ducks and drakes of. And there he was at the end of his tether
after having often painted the town tolerably pink without a beggarly
stiver. He drank needless to be told and it pointed only once more a
moral when he might quite easily be in a large way of business if--a
big if, however--he had contrived to cure himself of his particular
partiality.

All meantime were loudly lamenting the falling off in Irish shipping,
coastwise and foreign as well, which was all part and parcel of the same
thing. A Palgrave Murphy boat was put off the ways at Alexandra basin,
the only launch that year. Right enough the harbours were there only no
ships ever called.

There were wrecks and wreckers, the keeper said, who was evidently _au
fait_.

What he wanted to ascertain was why that ship ran bang against the only
rock in Galway bay when the Galway harbour scheme was mooted by a Mr
Worthington or some name like that, eh? Ask the then captain, he advised
them, how much palmoil the British government gave him for that day's
work, Captain John Lever of the Lever Line.

--Am I right, skipper? he queried of the sailor, now returning after his
private potation and the rest of his exertions.

That worthy picking up the scent of the fagend of the song or words
growled in wouldbe music but with great vim some kind of chanty or other
in seconds or thirds. Mr Bloom's sharp ears heard him then expectorate
the plug probably (which it was), so that he must have lodged it for the
time being in his fist while he did the drinking and making water jobs
and found it a bit sour after the liquid fire in question. Anyhow in
he rolled after his successful libation-_cum_-potation, introducing an
atmosphere of drink into the _soirÃ©e_, boisterously trolling, like a
veritable son of a seacook:

     _--The biscuits was as hard as brass
     And the beef as salt as Lot's wife's arse.
     O, Johnny Lever!
     Johnny Lever, O!_

After which effusion the redoubtable specimen duly arrived on the scene
and regaining his seat he sank rather than sat heavily on the form
provided. Skin-the-Goat, assuming he was he, evidently with an axe to
grind, was airing his grievances in a forcible-feeble philippic anent
the natural resources of Ireland or something of that sort which he
described in his lengthy dissertation as the richest country bar none on
the face of God's earth, far and away superior to England, with coal in
large quantities, six million pounds worth of pork exported every year,
ten millions between butter and eggs and all the riches drained out of
it by England levying taxes on the poor people that paid through the
nose always and gobbling up the best meat in the market and a lot more
surplus steam in the same vein. Their conversation accordingly became
general and all agreed that that was a fact. You could grow any mortal
thing in Irish soil, he stated, and there was that colonel Everard down
there in Navan growing tobacco. Where would you find anywhere the like
of Irish bacon? But a day of reckoning, he stated _crescendo_ with no
uncertain voice, thoroughly monopolising all the conversation, was in
store for mighty England, despite her power of pelf on account of her
crimes. There would be a fall and the greatest fall in history.
The Germans and the Japs were going to have their little lookin, he
affirmed. The Boers were the beginning of the end. Brummagem England was
toppling already and her downfall would be Ireland, her Achilles heel,
which he explained to them about the vulnerable point of Achilles, the
Greek hero, a point his auditors at once seized as he completely gripped
their attention by showing the tendon referred to on his boot. His
advice to every Irishman was: stay in the land of your birth and work
for Ireland and live for Ireland. Ireland, Parnell said, could not spare
a single one of her sons.

Silence all round marked the termination of his _finale_. The impervious
navigator heard these lurid tidings, undismayed.

--Take a bit of doing, boss, retaliated that rough diamond palpably a
bit peeved in response to the foregoing truism.

To which cold douche referring to downfall and so on the keeper
concurred but nevertheless held to his main view.

--Who's the best troops in the army? the grizzled old veteran irately
interrogated. And the best jumpers and racers? And the best admirals and
generals we've got? Tell me that.

--The Irish, for choice, retorted the cabby like Campbell, facial
blemishes apart.

--That's right, the old tarpaulin corroborated. The Irish catholic
peasant. He's the backbone of our empire. You know Jem Mullins?

While allowing him his individual opinions as everyman the keeper added
he cared nothing for any empire, ours or his, and considered no Irishman
worthy of his salt that served it. Then they began to have a few
irascible words when it waxed hotter, both, needless to say, appealing
to the listeners who followed the passage of arms with interest so long
as they didn't indulge in recriminations and come to blows.

From inside information extending over a series of years Mr Bloom was
rather inclined to poohpooh the suggestion as egregious balderdash for,
pending that consummation devoutly to be or not to be wished for, he was
fully cognisant of the fact that their neighbours across the channel,
unless they were much bigger fools than he took them for, rather
concealed their strength than the opposite. It was quite on a par with
the quixotic idea in certain quarters that in a hundred million years
the coal seam of the sister island would be played out and if, as
time went on, that turned out to be how the cat jumped all he could
personally say on the matter was that as a host of contingencies,
equally relevant to the issue, might occur ere then it was highly
advisable in the interim to try to make the most of both countries even
though poles apart. Another little interesting point, the amours of
whores and chummies, to put it in common parlance, reminded him Irish
soldiers had as often fought for England as against her, more so, in
fact. And now, why? So the scene between the pair of them, the licensee
of the place rumoured to be or have been Fitzharris, the famous
invincible, and the other, obviously bogus, reminded him forcibly as
being on all fours with the confidence trick, supposing, that is, it was
prearranged as the lookeron, a student of the human soul if anything,
the others seeing least of the game. And as for the lessee or keeper,
who probably wasn't the other person at all, he (B.) couldn't help
feeling and most properly it was better to give people like that the
goby unless you were a blithering idiot altogether and refuse to have
anything to do with them as a golden rule in private life and their
felonsetting, there always being the offchance of a Dannyman coming
forward and turning queen's evidence or king's now like Denis or Peter
Carey, an idea he utterly repudiated. Quite apart from that he disliked
those careers of wrongdoing and crime on principle. Yet, though such
criminal propensities had never been an inmate of his bosom in any
shape or form, he certainly did feel and no denying it (while inwardly
remaining what he was) a certain kind of admiration for a man who
had actually brandished a knife, cold steel, with the courage of his
political convictions (though, personally, he would never be a party to
any such thing), off the same bat as those love vendettas of the south,
have her or swing for her, when the husband frequently, after some words
passed between the two concerning her relations with the other lucky
mortal (he having had the pair watched), inflicted fatal injuries on
his adored one as a result of an alternative postnuptial _liaison_
by plunging his knife into her, until it just struck him that
Fitz, nicknamed Skin-the-Goat, merely drove the car for the actual
perpetrators of the outrage and so was not, if he was reliably informed,
actually party to the ambush which, in point of fact, was the plea some
legal luminary saved his skin on. In any case that was very ancient
history by now and as for our friend, the pseudo Skin-the-etcetera, he
had transparently outlived his welcome. He ought to have either died
naturally or on the scaffold high. Like actresses, always farewell
positively last performance then come up smiling again. Generous to a
fault of course, temperamental, no economising or any idea of the sort,
always snapping at the bone for the shadow. So similarly he had a very
shrewd suspicion that Mr Johnny Lever got rid of some l s d. in the
course of his perambulations round the docks in the congenial atmosphere
of the _Old Ireland_ tavern, come back to Erin and so on. Then as for
the other he had heard not so long before the same identical lingo as he
told Stephen how he simply but effectually silenced the offender.

--He took umbrage at something or other, that muchinjured but on the
whole eventempered person declared, I let slip. He called me a jew and
in a heated fashion offensively. So I without deviating from plain facts
in the least told him his God, I mean Christ, was a jew too and all his
family like me though in reality I'm not. That was one for him. A soft
answer turns away wrath. He hadn't a word to say for himself as everyone
saw. Am I not right?

He turned a long you are wrong gaze on Stephen of timorous dark pride
at the soft impeachment with a glance also of entreaty for he seemed to
glean in a kind of a way that it wasn't all exactly.

--_Ex quibus_, Stephen mumbled in a noncommittal accent, their two or
four eyes conversing, _Christus_ or Bloom his name is or after all any
other, _secundum carnem_.

--Of course, Mr B. proceeded to stipulate, you must look at both sides
of the question. It is hard to lay down any hard and fast rules as to
right and wrong but room for improvement all round there certainly is
though every country, they say, our own distressful included, has the
government it deserves. But with a little goodwill all round. It's all
very fine to boast of mutual superiority but what about mutual equality.
I resent violence and intolerance in any shape or form. It never
reaches anything or stops anything. A revolution must come on the due
instalments plan. It's a patent absurdity on the face of it to hate
people because they live round the corner and speak another vernacular,
in the next house so to speak.

--Memorable bloody bridge battle and seven minutes' war, Stephen
assented, between Skinner's alley and Ormond market.

Yes, Mr Bloom thoroughly agreed, entirely endorsing the remark, that
was overwhelmingly right. And the whole world was full of that sort of
thing.

--You just took the words out of my mouth, he said. A hocuspocus of
conflicting evidence that candidly you couldn't remotely...

All those wretched quarrels, in his humble opinion, stirring up
bad blood, from some bump of combativeness or gland of some kind,
erroneously supposed to be about a punctilio of honour and a flag, were
very largely a question of the money question which was at the back of
everything greed and jealousy, people never knowing when to stop.

--They accuse, remarked he audibly.

He turned away from the others who probably and spoke nearer to, so as
the others in case they.

--Jews, he softly imparted in an aside in Stephen's ear, are accused of
ruining. Not a vestige of truth in it, I can safely say. History, would
you be surprised to learn, proves up to the hilt Spain decayed when the
inquisition hounded the jews out and England prospered when Cromwell,
an uncommonly able ruffian who in other respects has much to answer for,
imported them. Why? Because they are imbued with the proper spirit. They
are practical and are proved to be so. I don't want to indulge in any
because you know the standard works on the subject and then orthodox as
you are. But in the economic, not touching religion, domain the priest
spells poverty. Spain again, you saw in the war, compared with goahead
America. Turks. It's in the dogma. Because if they didn't believe they'd
go straight to heaven when they die they'd try to live better, at least
so I think. That's the juggle on which the p.p's raise the wind on false
pretences. I'm, he resumed with dramatic force, as good an Irishman
as that rude person I told you about at the outset and I want to see
everyone, concluded he, all creeds and classes _pro rata_ having a
comfortable tidysized income, in no niggard fashion either, something
in the neighbourhood of 300 pounds per annum. That's the vital issue
at stake and it's feasible and would be provocative of friendlier
intercourse between man and man. At least that's my idea for what it's
worth. I call that patriotism. _Ubi patria_, as we learned a smattering
of in our classical days in _Alma Mater, vita bene_. Where you can live
well, the sense is, if you work.

Over his untastable apology for a cup of coffee, listening to this
synopsis of things in general, Stephen stared at nothing in particular.
He could hear, of course, all kinds of words changing colour like those
crabs about Ringsend in the morning burrowing quickly into all colours
of different sorts of the same sand where they had a home somewhere
beneath or seemed to. Then he looked up and saw the eyes that said or
didn't say the words the voice he heard said, if you work.

--Count me out, he managed to remark, meaning work.

The eyes were surprised at this observation because as he, the person
who owned them pro tem. observed or rather his voice speaking did, all
must work, have to, together.

--I mean, of course, the other hastened to affirm, work in the widest
possible sense. Also literary labour not merely for the kudos of
the thing. Writing for the newspapers which is the readiest channel
nowadays. That's work too. Important work. After all, from the little
I know of you, after all the money expended on your education you are
entitled to recoup yourself and command your price. You have every bit
as much right to live by your pen in pursuit of your philosophy as the
peasant has. What? You both belong to Ireland, the brain and the brawn.
Each is equally important.

--You suspect, Stephen retorted with a sort of a half laugh, that I may
be important because I belong to the _faubourg Saint Patrice_ called
Ireland for short.

--I would go a step farther, Mr Bloom insinuated.

--But I suspect, Stephen interrupted, that Ireland must be important
because it belongs to me.

--What belongs, queried Mr Bloom bending, fancying he was perhaps under
some misapprehension. Excuse me. Unfortunately, I didn't catch the
latter portion. What was it you...?

Stephen, patently crosstempered, repeated and shoved aside his mug of
coffee or whatever you like to call it none too politely, adding: 1170

--We can't change the country. Let us change the subject.

At this pertinent suggestion Mr Bloom, to change the subject, looked
down but in a quandary, as he couldn't tell exactly what construction
to put on belongs to which sounded rather a far cry. The rebuke of some
kind was clearer than the other part. Needless to say the fumes of
his recent orgy spoke then with some asperity in a curious bitter way
foreign to his sober state. Probably the homelife to which Mr B attached
the utmost importance had not been all that was needful or he hadn't
been familiarised with the right sort of people. With a touch of fear
for the young man beside him whom he furtively scrutinised with an air
of some consternation remembering he had just come back from Paris,
the eyes more especially reminding him forcibly of father and sister,
failing to throw much light on the subject, however, he brought to mind
instances of cultured fellows that promised so brilliantly nipped in the
bud of premature decay and nobody to blame but themselves. For instance
there was the case of O'Callaghan, for one, the halfcrazy faddist,
respectably connected though of inadequate means, with his mad vagaries
among whose other gay doings when rotto and making himself a nuisance
to everybody all round he was in the habit of ostentatiously sporting in
public a suit of brown paper (a fact). And then the usual _denouement_
after the fun had gone on fast and furious he got 1190 landed into hot
water and had to be spirited away by a few friends, after a strong hint
to a blind horse from John Mallon of Lower Castle Yard, so as not to
be made amenable under section two of the criminal law amendment act,
certain names of those subpoenaed being handed in but not divulged
for reasons which will occur to anyone with a pick of brains. Briefly,
putting two and two together, six sixteen which he pointedly turned a
deaf ear to, Antonio and so forth, jockeys and esthetes and the tattoo
which was all the go in the seventies or thereabouts even in the house
of lords because early in life the occupant of the throne, then heir
apparent, the other members of the upper ten and other high personages
simply following in the footsteps of the head of the state, he reflected
about the errors of notorieties and crowned heads running counter to
morality such as the Cornwall case a number of years before under their
veneer in a way scarcely intended by nature, a thing good Mrs Grundy,
as the law stands, was terribly down on though not for the reason they
thought they were probably whatever it was except women chiefly who were
always fiddling more or less at one another it being largely a matter of
dress and all the rest of it. Ladies who like distinctive underclothing
should, and every welltailored man must, trying to make the gap wider
between them by innuendo and give more of a genuine filip to acts of
impropriety between the two, she unbuttoned his and then he untied her,
mind the pin, whereas savages in the cannibal islands, say, at ninety
degrees in the shade not caring a continental. However, reverting to the
original, there were on the other hand others who had forced their way
to the top from the lowest rung by the aid of their bootstraps. Sheer
force of natural genius, that. With brains, sir.

For which and further reasons he felt it was his interest and duty even
to wait on and profit by the unlookedfor occasion though why he could
not exactly tell being as it was already several shillings to the
bad having in fact let himself in for it. Still to cultivate the
acquaintance of someone of no uncommon calibre who could provide food
for reflection would amply repay any small. Intellectual stimulation,
as such, was, he felt, from time to time a firstrate tonic for the mind.
Added to which was the coincidence of meeting, discussion, dance, row,
old salt of the here today and gone tomorrow type, night loafers, the
whole galaxy of events, all went to make up a miniature cameo of the
world we live in especially as the lives of the submerged tenth, viz.
coalminers, divers, scavengers etc., were very much under the microscope
lately. To improve the shining hour he wondered whether he might meet
with anything approaching the same luck as Mr Philip Beaufoy if taken
down in writing suppose he were to pen something out of the common
groove (as he fully intended doing) at the rate of one guinea per
column. _My Experiences_, let us say, _in a Cabman's Shelter_.

The pink edition extra sporting of the _Telegraph_ tell a graphic lie
lay, as luck would have it, beside his elbow and as he was just puzzling
again, far from satisfied, over a country belonging to him and the
preceding rebus the vessel came from Bridgwater and the postcard was
addressed A. Boudin find the captain's age, his eyes went aimlessly
over the respective captions which came under his special province the
allembracing give us this day our daily press. First he got a bit of a
start but it turned out to be only something about somebody named H.
du Boyes, agent for typewriters or something like that. Great battle,
Tokio. Lovemaking in Irish, 200 pounds damages. Gordon Bennett.
Emigration Swindle. Letter from His Grace. William. Ascot meeting,
the Gold Cup. Victory of outsider _Throwaway_ recalls Derby of '92 when
Capt. Marshall's dark horse _Sir Hugo_ captured the blue ribband at long
odds. New York disaster. Thousand lives lost. Foot and Mouth. Funeral of
the late Mr Patrick Dignam.

So to change the subject he read about Dignam R. I. P. which, he
reflected, was anything but a gay sendoff. Or a change of address
anyway.

--_This morning_ (Hynes put it in of course) _the remains of the late Mr
Patrick Dignam were removed from his residence, no 9 Newbridge Avenue,
Sandymount, for interment in Glasnevin. The deceased gentleman was a
most popular and genial personality in city life and his demise after a
brief illness came as a great shock to citizens of all classes by whom
he is deeply regretted. The obsequies, at which many friends of the
deceased were present, were carried out_ (certainly Hynes wrote it with
a nudge from Corny) _by Messrs H. J. O'Neill and Son, 164 North Strand
Road. The mourners included: Patk. Dignam (son), Bernard Corrigan
(brother-in-law), Jno. Henry Menton, solr, Martin Cunningham, John
Power, eatondph 1/8 ador dorador douradora_ (must be where he called
Monks the dayfather about Keyes's ad) _Thomas Kernan, Simon Dedalus,
Stephen Dedalus B.,4., Edw. J. Lambert, Cornelius T. Kelleher, Joseph
M'C Hynes, L. Boom, CP M'Coy,--M'lntosh and several others_.

Nettled not a little by L. _Boom_ (as it incorrectly stated) and the
line of bitched type but tickled to death simultaneously by C. P. M'Coy
and Stephen Dedalus B. A. who were conspicuous, needless to say, by
their total absence (to say nothing of M'Intosh) L. Boom pointed it
out to his companion B. A. engaged in stifling another yawn, half
nervousness, not forgetting the usual crop of nonsensical howlers of
misprints.

--Is that first epistle to the Hebrews, he asked as soon as his bottom
jaw would let him, in? Text: open thy mouth and put thy foot in it.

--It is. Really, Mr Bloom said (though first he fancied he alluded to
the archbishop till he added about foot and mouth with which there could
be no possible connection) overjoyed to set his mind at rest and a bit
flabbergasted at Myles Crawford's after all managing to. There.

While the other was reading it on page two Boom (to give him for the
nonce his new misnomer) whiled away a few odd leisure moments in fits
and starts with the account of the third event at Ascot on page three,
his side. Value 1000 sovs with 3000 sovs in specie added. For entire
colts and fillies. Mr F. Alexander's _Throwaway_, b. h. by _Rightaway_,
5 yrs, 9 st 4 lbs (W. Lane) 1, lord Howard de Walden's _Zinfandel_ (M.
Cannon) z, Mr W. Bass's _Sceptre_ 3. Betting 5 to 4 on _Zinfandel_,
20 to 1 _Throwaway_ (off). _Sceptre_ a shade heavier, 5 to 4 on
_Zinfandel_, 20 to 1 _Throwaway_ (off). _Throwaway_ and _Zinfandel_
stood close order. It was anybody's race then the rank outsider drew to
the fore, got long lead, beating lord Howard de Walden's chestnut
colt and Mr W. Bass's bay filly Sceptre on a 2 1/2 mile course. Winner
trained by Braime so that Lenehan's version of the business was all pure
buncombe. Secured the verdict cleverly by a length. 1000 sovs with
3000 in specie. Also ran: J de Bremond's (French horse Bantam Lyons was
anxiously inquiring after not in yet but expected any minute) _Maximum
II_. Different ways of bringing off a coup. Lovemaking damages. Though
that halfbaked Lyons ran off at a tangent in his impetuosity to get
left. Of course gambling eminently lent itself to that sort of thing
though as the event turned out the poor fool hadn't much reason to
congratulate himself on his pick, the forlorn hope. Guesswork it reduced
itself to eventually.

--There was every indication they would arrive at that, he, Bloom, said.

--Who? the other, whose hand by the way was hurt, said.

One morning you would open the paper, the cabman affirmed, and read:
_Return of Parnell_. He bet them what they liked. A Dublin fusilier was
in that shelter one night and said he saw him in South Africa. Pride it
was killed him. He ought to have done away with himself or lain low for
a time after committee room no 15 until he was his old self again with
no-one to point a finger at him. Then they would all to a man have gone
down on their marrowbones to him to come back when he had recovered
his senses. Dead he wasn't. Simply absconded somewhere. The coffin they
brought over was full of stones. He changed his name to De Wet, the Boer
general. He made a mistake to fight the priests. And so forth and so on.

All the same Bloom (properly so dubbed) was rather surprised at their
memories for in nine cases out of ten it was a case of tarbarrels and
not singly but in their thousands and then complete oblivion because it
was twenty odd years. Highly unlikely of course there was even a shadow
of truth in the stones and, even supposing, he thought a return highly
inadvisable, all things considered. Something evidently riled them in
his death. Either he petered out too tamely of acute pneumonia just when
his various different political arrangements were nearing completion
or whether it transpired he owed his death to his having neglected to
change his boots and clothes-after a wetting when a cold resulted and
failing to consult a specialist he being confined to his room till he
eventually died of it amid widespread regret before a fortnight was at
an end or quite possibly they were distressed to find the job was taken
out of their hands. Of course nobody being acquainted with his movements
even before there was absolutely no clue as to his whereabouts which
were decidedly of the _Alice, where art thou_ order even prior to his
starting to go under several aliases such as Fox and Stewart so the
remark which emanated from friend cabby might be within the bounds of
possibility. Naturally then it would prey on his mind as a born leader
of men which undoubtedly he was and a commanding figure, a sixfooter
or at any rate five feet ten or eleven in his stockinged feet, whereas
Messrs So and So who, though they weren't even a patch on the former
man, ruled the roost after their redeeming features were very few and
far between. It certainly pointed a moral, the idol with feet of clay,
and then seventytwo of his trusty henchmen rounding on him with mutual
mudslinging. And the identical same with murderers. You had to come
back. That haunting sense kind of drew you. To show the understudy in
the title _rÃ´le_ how to. He saw him once on the auspicious occasion
when they broke up the type in the _Insuppressible_ or was it _United
Ireland_, a privilege he keenly appreciated, and, in point of fact,
handed him his silk hat when it was knocked off and he said _Thank you_,
excited as he undoubtedly was under his frigid exterior notwithstanding
the little misadventure mentioned between the cup and the lip: what's
bred in the bone. Still as regards return. You were a lucky dog if
they didn't set the terrier at you directly you got back. Then a lot of
shillyshally usually followed, Tom for and Dick and Harry against. And
then, number one, you came up against the man in possession and had to
produce your credentials like the claimant in the Tichborne case,
Roger Charles Tichborne, _Bella_ was the boat's name to the best of his
recollection he, the heir, went down in as the evidence went to show
and there was a tattoo mark too in Indian ink, lord Bellew was it, as he
might very easily have picked up the details from some pal on board ship
and then, when got up to tally with the description given, introduce
himself with: _Excuse me, my name is So and So_ or some such commonplace
remark. A more prudent course, as Bloom said to the not over effusive,
in fact like the distinguished personage under discussion beside him,
would have been to sound the lie of the land first.

--That bitch, that English whore, did for him, the shebeen proprietor
commented. She put the first nail in his coffin.

--Fine lump of a woman all the same, the _soi-disant_ townclerk Henry
Campbell remarked, and plenty of her. She loosened many a man's thighs.
I seen her picture in a barber's. The husband was a captain or an
officer.

--Ay, Skin-the-Goat amusingly added, he was and a cottonball one.

This gratuitous contribution of a humorous character occasioned a fair
amount of laughter among his _entourage_. As regards Bloom he, without
the faintest suspicion of a smile, merely gazed in the direction of
the door and reflected upon the historic story which had aroused
extraordinary interest at the time when the facts, to make matters
worse, were made public with the usual affectionate letters that passed
between them full of sweet nothings. First it was strictly Platonic till
nature intervened and an attachment sprang up between them till bit by
bit matters came to a climax and the matter became the talk of the town
till the staggering blow came as a welcome intelligence to not a few
evildisposed, however, who were resolved upon encompassing his downfall
though the thing was public property all along though not to anything
like the sensational extent that it subsequently blossomed into. Since
their names were coupled, though, since he was her declared favourite,
where was the particular necessity to proclaim it to the rank and file
from the housetops, the fact, namely, that he had shared her bedroom
which came out in the witnessbox on oath when a thrill went through the
packed court literally electrifying everybody in the shape of witnesses
swearing to having witnessed him on such and such a particular date in
the act of scrambling out of an upstairs apartment with the assistance
of a ladder in night apparel, having gained admittance in the same
fashion, a fact the weeklies, addicted to the lubric a little, simply
coined shoals of money out of. Whereas the simple fact of the case was
it was simply a case of the husband not being up to the scratch, with
nothing in common between them beyond the name, and then a real man
arriving on the scene, strong to the verge of weakness, falling a victim
to her siren charms and forgetting home ties, the usual sequel, to bask
in the loved one's smiles. The eternal question of the life connubial,
needless to say, cropped up. Can real love, supposing there happens to
be another chap in the case, exist between married folk? Poser.
Though it was no concern of theirs absolutely if he regarded her with
affection, carried away by a wave of folly. A magnificent specimen of
manhood he was truly augmented obviously by gifts of a high order, as
compared with the other military supernumerary that is (who was just the
usual everyday _farewell, my gallant captain_ kind of an individual in
the light dragoons, the 18th hussars to be accurate) and inflammable
doubtless (the fallen leader, that is, not the other) in his own
peculiar way which she of course, woman, quickly perceived as highly
likely to carve his way to fame which he almost bid fair to do till the
priests and ministers of the gospel as a whole, his erstwhile staunch
adherents, and his beloved evicted tenants for whom he had done yeoman
service in the rural parts of the country by taking up the cudgels on
their behalf in a way that exceeded their most sanguine expectations,
very effectually cooked his matrimonial goose, thereby heaping coals of
fire on his head much in the same way as the fabled ass's kick. Looking
back now in a retrospective kind of arrangement all seemed a kind of
dream. And then coming back was the worst thing you ever did because it
went without saying you would feel out of place as things always moved
with the times. Why, as he reflected, Irishtown strand, a locality he
had not been in for quite a number of years looked different somehow
since, as it happened, he went to reside on the north side. North or
south, however, it was just the wellknown case of hot passion, pure and
simple, upsetting the applecart with a vengeance and just bore out the
very thing he was saying as she also was Spanish or half so, types that
wouldn't do things by halves, passionate abandon of the south, casting
every shred of decency to the winds.

--Just bears out what I was saying, he, with glowing bosom said to
Stephen, about blood and the sun. And, if I don't greatly mistake she
was Spanish too.

--The king of Spain's daughter, Stephen answered, adding something or
other rather muddled about farewell and adieu to you Spanish onions and
the first land called the Deadman and from Ramhead to Scilly was so and
so many.

--Was she? Bloom ejaculated, surprised though not astonished by any
means, I never heard that rumour before. Possible, especially there, it
was as she lived there. So, Spain.

Carefully avoiding a book in his pocket _Sweets of_, which reminded him
by the by of that Cap l street library book out of date, he took out his
pocketbook and, turning over the various contents it contained rapidly
finally he.

--Do you consider, by the by, he said, thoughtfully selecting a faded
photo which he laid on the table, that a Spanish type?

Stephen, obviously addressed, looked down on the photo showing a large
sized lady with her fleshy charms on evidence in an open fashion as she
was in the full bloom of womanhood in evening dress cut ostentatiously
low for the occasion to give a liberal display of bosom, with more than
vision of breasts, her full lips parted and some perfect teeth, standing
near, ostensibly with gravity, a piano on the rest of which was _In Old
Madrid_, a ballad, pretty in its way, which was then all the vogue. Her
(the lady's) eyes, dark, large, looked at Stephen, about to smile about
something to be admired, Lafayette of Westmoreland street, Dublin's
premier photographic artist, being responsible for the esthetic
execution.

--Mrs Bloom, my wife the _prima donna_ Madam Marion Tweedy, Bloom
indicated. Taken a few years since. In or about ninety six. Very like
her then.

Beside the young man he looked also at the photo of the lady now his
1440 legal wife who, he intimated, was the accomplished daughter of
Major Brian Tweedy and displayed at an early age remarkable proficiency
as a singer having even made her bow to the public when her years
numbered barely sweet sixteen. As for the face it was a speaking
likeness in expression but it did not do justice to her figure which
came in for a lot of notice usually and which did not come out to the
best advantage in that getup. She could without difficulty, he said,
have posed for the ensemble, not to dwell on certain opulent curves of
the. He dwelt, being a bit of an artist in his spare time, on the female
form in general developmentally because, as it so happened, no later
than that afternoon he had seen those Grecian statues, 1450 perfectly
developed as works of art, in the National Museum. Marble could give
the original, shoulders, back, all the symmetry, all the rest. Yes,
puritanisme, it does though Saint Joseph's sovereign thievery alors
(Bandez!) Figne toi trop. Whereas no photo could because it simply
wasn't art in a word.

The spirit moving him he would much have liked to follow Jack Tar's good
example and leave the likeness there for a very few minutes to speak for
itself on the plea he so that the other could drink in the beauty for
himself, her stage presence being, frankly, a treat in itself which the
camera could not at all do justice to. But it was scarcely professional
etiquette so. Though it was a warm pleasant sort of a night now yet
wonderfully cool for the season considering, for sunshine after storm.
And he did feel a kind of need there and then to follow suit like a
kind of inward voice and satisfy a possible need by moving a motion.
Nevertheless he sat tight just viewing the slightly soiled photo creased
by opulent curves, none the worse for wear however, and looked away
thoughtfully with the intention of not further increasing the
other's possible embarrassment while gauging her symmetry of heaving
_embonpoint_. In fact the slight soiling was only an added charm like
the case of linen slightly soiled, good as new, much better in fact
with the starch out. Suppose she was gone when he? I looked for the lamp
which she told me came into his mind but merely as a passing fancy of
his because he then recollected the morning littered bed etcetera and
the book about Ruby with met him pike hoses (_sic_) in it which must
have fell down sufficiently appropriately beside the domestic chamberpot
with apologies to Lindley Murray.

The vicinity of the young man he certainly relished, educated,
_distinguÃ©_ and impulsive into the bargain, far and away the pick of the
bunch though you wouldn't think he had it in him yet you would. Besides
he said the picture was handsome which, say what you like, it was though
at the moment she was distinctly stouter. And why not? An awful lot of
makebelieve went on about that sort of thing involving a lifelong slur
with the usual splash page of gutterpress about the same old matrimonial
tangle alleging misconduct with professional golfer or the newest
stage favourite instead of being honest and aboveboard about the whole
business. How they were fated to meet and an attachment sprang up
between the two so that their names were coupled in the public eye
was told in court with letters containing the habitual mushy and
compromising expressions leaving no loophole to show that they openly
cohabited two or three times a week at some wellknown seaside hotel and
relations, when the thing ran its normal course, became in due course
intimate. Then the decree _nisi_ and the King's proctor tries to show
cause why and, he failing to quash it, _nisi_ was made absolute. But as
for that the two misdemeanants, wrapped up as they largely were in one
another, could safely afford to ignore it as they very largely did till
the matter was put in the hands of a solicitor who filed a petition for
the party wronged in due course. He, B, enjoyed the distinction of being
close to Erin's uncrowned king in the flesh when the thing occurred on
the historic _fracas_ when the fallen leader's, who notoriously stuck to
his guns to the last drop even when clothed in the mantle of adultery,
(leader's) trusty henchmen to the number of ten or a dozen or
possibly even more than that penetrated into the printing works of the
_Insuppressible_ or no it was _United Ireland_ (a by no means by the
by appropriate appellative) and broke up the typecases with hammers or
something like that all on account of some scurrilous effusions from
the facile pens of the O'Brienite scribes at the usual mudslinging
occupation reflecting on the erstwhile tribune's private morals. Though
palpably a radically altered man he was still a commanding figure though
carelessly garbed as usual with that look of settled purpose which went
a long way with the shillyshallyers till they discovered to their vast
discomfiture that their idol had feet of clay after placing him upon a
pedestal which she, however, was the first to perceive. As those were
particularly hot times in the general hullaballoo Bloom sustained a
minor injury from a nasty prod of some chap's elbow in the crowd that
of course congregated lodging some place about the pit of the stomach,
fortunately not of a grave character. His hat (Parnell's) a silk one was
inadvertently knocked off and, as a matter of strict history, Bloom was
the man who picked it up in the crush after witnessing the occurrence
meaning to return it to him (and return it to him he did with the utmost
celerity) who panting and hatless and whose thoughts were miles away
from his hat at the time all the same being a gentleman born with a
stake in the country he, as a matter of fact, having gone into it more
for the kudos of the thing than anything else, what's bred in the bone
instilled into him in infancy at his mother's knee in the shape of
knowing what good form was came out at once because he turned round to
the donor and thanked him with perfect _aplomb_, saying: _Thank you,
sir_, though in a very different tone of voice from the ornament of the
legal profession whose headgear Bloom also set to rights earlier in the
course of the day, history repeating itself with a difference, after
the burial of a mutual friend when they had left him alone in his glory
after the grim task of having committed his remains to the grave.

On the other hand what incensed him more inwardly was the blatant jokes
of the cabman and so on who passed it all off as a jest, laughing 1530
immoderately, pretending to understand everything, the why and the
wherefore, and in reality not knowing their own minds, it being a case
for the two parties themselves unless it ensued that the legitimate
husband happened to be a party to it owing to some anonymous letter from
the usual boy Jones, who happened to come across them at the crucial
moment in a loving position locked in one another's arms, drawing
attention to their illicit proceedings and leading up to a domestic
rumpus and the erring fair one begging forgiveness of her lord and
master upon her knees and promising to sever the connection and not
receive his visits any more if only the aggrieved husband would overlook
the matter and let bygones be bygones with tears in her eyes though
possibly with her tongue in her fair cheek at the same time as quite
possibly there were several others. He personally, being of a sceptical
bias, believed and didn't make the smallest bones about saying so either
that man or men in the plural were always hanging around on the waiting
list about a lady, even supposing she was the best wife in the world
and they got on fairly well together for the sake of argument, when,
neglecting her duties, she chose to be tired of wedded life and was on
for a little flutter in polite debauchery to press their attentions on
her with improper intent, the upshot being that her affections centred
on another, the cause of many _liaisons_ between still attractive
married women getting on for fair and forty and younger men, no doubt as
several famous cases of feminine infatuation proved up to the hilt.

It was a thousand pities a young fellow, blessed with an allowance of
brains as his neighbour obviously was, should waste his valuable time
with profligate women who might present him with a nice dose to last him
his lifetime. In the nature of single blessedness he would one day take
unto himself a wife when Miss Right came on the scene but in the interim
ladies' society was a _conditio sine qua non_ though he had the gravest
possible doubts, not that he wanted in the smallest to pump Stephen
about Miss Ferguson (who was very possibly the particular lodestar who
brought him down to Irishtown so early in the morning), as to whether he
would find much satisfaction basking in the boy and girl courtship idea
and the company of smirking misses without a penny to their names bi or
triweekly with the orthodox preliminary canter of complimentplaying and
walking out leading up to fond lovers' ways and flowers and chocs. To
think of him house and homeless, rooked by some landlady worse than any
stepmother, was really too bad at his age. The queer suddenly things
he popped out with attracted the elder man who was several years the
other's senior or like his father but something substantial he certainly
ought to eat even were it only an eggflip made on unadulterated maternal
nutriment or, failing that, the homely Humpty Dumpty boiled.

--At what o'clock did you dine? he questioned of the slim form and tired
though unwrinkled face.

--Some time yesterday, Stephen said.

--Yesterday! exclaimed Bloom till he remembered it was already tomorrow
Friday. Ah, you mean it's after twelve!

--The day before yesterday, Stephen said, improving on himself.

Literally astounded at this piece of intelligence Bloom reflected.
Though they didn't see eye to eye in everything a certain analogy there
somehow was as if both their minds were travelling, so to speak, in the
one train of thought. At his age when dabbling in politics roughly
some score of years previously when he had been a _quasi_ aspirant to
parliamentary honours in the Buckshot Foster days he too recollected in
retrospect (which was a source of keen satisfaction in itself) he had
a sneaking regard for those same ultra ideas. For instance when the
evicted tenants question, then at its first inception, bulked largely in
people's mind though, it goes without saying, not contributing a copper
or pinning his faith absolutely to its dictums, some of which wouldn't
exactly hold water, he at the outset in principle at all events was in
thorough sympathy with peasant possession as voicing the trend of modern
opinion (a partiality, however, which, realising his mistake, he was
subsequently partially cured of) and even was twitted with going a
step farther than Michael Davitt in the striking views he at one time
inculcated as a backtothelander, which was one reason he strongly
resented the innuendo put upon him in so barefaced a fashion by our
friend at the gathering of the clans in Barney Kiernan's so that he,
though often considerably misunderstood and the least pugnacious of
mortals, be it repeated, departed from his customary habit to give
him (metaphorically) one in the gizzard though, so far as politics
themselves were concerned, he was only too conscious of the casualties
invariably resulting from propaganda and displays of mutual animosity
and the misery and suffering it entailed as a foregone conclusion on
fine young fellows, chiefly, destruction of the fittest, in a word.

Anyhow upon weighing up the pros and cons, getting on for one, as it
was, it was high time to be retiring for the night. The crux was it
was a bit risky to bring him home as eventualities might possibly ensue
(somebody having a temper of her own sometimes) and spoil the hash
altogether as on the night he misguidedly brought home a dog (breed
unknown) with a lame paw (not that the cases were either identical or
the reverse though he had hurt his hand too) to Ontario Terrace as he
very distinctly remembered, having been there, so to speak. On the
other hand it was altogether far and away too late for the Sandymount
or Sandycove suggestion so that he was in some perplexity as to which of
the two alternatives. Everything pointed to the fact that it behoved him
to avail himself to the full of the opportunity, all things considered.
His initial impression was he was a shade standoffish or not over
effusive but it grew on him someway. For one thing he mightn't what you
call jump at the idea, if approached, and what mostly worried him was
he didn't know how to lead up to it or word it exactly, supposing he
did entertain the proposal, as it would afford him very great personal
pleasure if he would allow him to help to put coin in his way or some
wardrobe, if found suitable. At all events he wound up by concluding,
eschewing for the nonce hidebound precedent, a cup of Epps's cocoa and
a shakedown for the night plus the use of a rug or two and overcoat
doubled into a pillow at least he would be in safe hands and as warm as
a toast on a trivet he failed to perceive any very vast amount of harm
in that always with the proviso no rumpus of any sort was kicked up.
A move had to be made because that merry old soul, the grasswidower
in question who appeared to be glued to the spot, didn't appear in any
particular hurry to wend his way home to his dearly beloved Queenstown
and it was highly likely some sponger's bawdyhouse of retired beauties
where age was no bar off Sheriff street lower would be the best clue
to that equivocal character's whereabouts for a few days to come,
alternately racking their feelings (the mermaids') with sixchamber
revolver anecdotes verging on the tropical calculated to freeze
the marrow of anybody's bones and mauling their largesized charms
betweenwhiles with rough and tumble gusto to the accompaniment of large
potations of potheen and the usual blarney about himself for as to who
he in reality was let x equal my right name and address, as Mr Algebra
remarks _passim_. At the same time he inwardly chuckled over his gentle
repartee to the blood and ouns champion about his god being a jew.
People could put up with being bitten by a wolf but what properly riled
them was a bite from a sheep. The most vulnerable point too of tender
Achilles. Your god was a jew. Because mostly they appeared to imagine he
came from Carrick-on-Shannon or somewhereabouts in the county Sligo.

--I propose, our hero eventually suggested after mature reflection while
prudently pocketing her photo, as it's rather stuffy here you just come
home with me and talk things over. My diggings are quite close in the
vicinity. You can't drink that stuff. Do you like cocoa? Wait. I'll just
pay this lot.

The best plan clearly being to clear out, the remainder being plain
sailing, he beckoned, while prudently pocketing the photo, to the keeper
of the shanty who didn't seem to.

--Yes, that's the best, he assured Stephen to whom for the matter of
that Brazen Head or him or anywhere else was all more or less.

All kinds of Utopian plans were flashing through his (B's) busy brain,
education (the genuine article), literature, journalism, prize titbits,
up to date billing, concert tours in English watering resorts packed
with hydros and seaside theatres, turning money away, duets in Italian
with the accent perfectly true to nature and a quantity of other
things, no necessity, of course, to tell the world and his wife from the
housetops about it, and a slice of luck. An opening was all was wanted.
Because he more than suspected he had his father's voice to bank his
hopes on which it was quite on the cards he had so it would be just as
well, by the way no harm, to trail the conversation in the direction of
that particular red herring just to.

The cabby read out of the paper he had got hold of that the former
viceroy, earl Cadogan, had presided at the cabdrivers' association
dinner in London somewhere. Silence with a yawn or two accompanied this
thrilling announcement. Then the old specimen in the corner who appeared
to have some spark of vitality left read out that sir Anthony MacDonnell
had left Euston for the chief secretary's lodge or words to that effect.
To which absorbing piece of intelligence echo answered why.

--Give us a squint at that literature, grandfather, the ancient mariner
put in, manifesting some natural impatience.

--And welcome, answered the elderly party thus addressed.

The sailor lugged out from a case he had a pair of greenish goggles
which he very slowly hooked over his nose and both ears.

--Are you bad in the eyes? the sympathetic personage like the townclerk
queried.

--Why, answered the seafarer with the tartan beard, who seemingly was
a bit of a literary cove in his own small way, staring out of seagreen
portholes as you might well describe them as, I uses goggles reading.
Sand in the Red Sea done that. One time I could read a book in the dark,
manner of speaking. _The Arabian Nights Entertainment_ was my favourite
and _Red as a Rose is She._

Hereupon he pawed the journal open and pored upon Lord only knows what,
found drowned or the exploits of King Willow, Iremonger having made a
hundred and something second wicket not out for Notts, during which
time (completely regardless of Ire) the keeper was intensely occupied
loosening an apparently new or secondhand boot which manifestly pinched
him as he muttered against whoever it was sold it, all of them who were
sufficiently awake enough to be picked out by their facial expressions,
that is to say, either simply looking on glumly or passing a trivial
remark.

To cut a long story short Bloom, grasping the situation, was the first
to rise from his seat so as not to outstay their welcome having first
and foremost, being as good as his word that he would foot the bill for
the occasion, taken the wise precaution to unobtrusively motion to mine
host as a parting shot a scarcely perceptible sign when the others were
not looking to the effect that the amount due was forthcoming, making a
grand total of fourpence (the amount he deposited unobtrusively in
four coppers, literally the last of the Mohicans), he having previously
spotted on the printed pricelist for all who ran to read opposite him
in unmistakable figures, coffee 2d, confectionery do, and honestly well
worth twice the money once in a way, as Wetherup used to remark.

--Come, he counselled to close the _sÃ©ance_.

Seeing that the ruse worked and the coast was clear they left the
shelter or shanty together and the _Ã©lite_ society of oilskin and
company whom nothing short of an earthquake would move out of their
_dolce far niente_. Stephen, who confessed to still feeling poorly and
fagged out, paused at the, for a moment, the door.

--One thing I never understood, he said to be original on the spur of
the moment. Why they put tables upside down at night, I mean chairs
upside down, on the tables in cafes. To which impromptu the neverfailing
Bloom replied without a moment's hesitation, saying straight off:

--To sweep the floor in the morning.

So saying he skipped around, nimbly considering, frankly at the same
time apologetic to get on his companion's right, a habit of his, by the
bye, his right side being, in classical idiom, his tender Achilles. The
night air was certainly now a treat to breathe though Stephen was a bit
weak on his pins.

--It will (the air) do you good, Bloom said, meaning also the walk, in
a moment. The only thing is to walk then you'll feel a different man.
Come. It's not far. Lean on me.

Accordingly he passed his left arm in Stephen's right and led him on
accordingly.

--Yes, Stephen said uncertainly because he thought he felt a strange
kind of flesh of a different man approach him, sinewless and wobbly and
all that.

Anyhow they passed the sentrybox with stones, brazier etc. where
the municipal supernumerary, ex Gumley, was still to all intents and
purposes wrapped in the arms of Murphy, as the adage has it, dreaming
of fresh fields and pastures new. And _apropos_ of coffin of stones the
analogy was not at all bad as it was in fact a stoning to death on the
part of seventytwo out of eighty odd constituencies that ratted at the
time of the split and chiefly the belauded peasant class, probably the
selfsame evicted tenants he had put in their holdings.

So they turned on to chatting about music, a form of art for which
Bloom, as a pure amateur, possessed the greatest love, as they made
tracks arm in arm across Beresford place. Wagnerian music, though
confessedly grand in its way, was a bit too heavy for Bloom and hard to
follow at the first go-off but the music of Mercadante's _Huguenots_,
Meyerbeer's _Seven Last Words on the Cross_ and Mozart's _Twelfth Mass_
he simply revelled in, the _Gloria_ in that being, to his mind, the acme
of first class music as such, literally knocking everything else into
a cocked hat. He infinitely preferred the sacred music of the catholic
church to anything the opposite shop could offer in that line such as
those Moody and Sankey hymns or _Bid me to live and i will live
thy protestant to be_. He also yielded to none in his admiration of
Rossini's _Stabat Mater_, a work simply abounding in immortal numbers,
in which his wife, Madam Marion Tweedy, made a hit, a veritable
sensation, he might safely say, greatly adding to her other laureis and
putting the others totally in the shade, in the jesuit fathers' church
in upper Gardiner street, the sacred edifice being thronged to the
doors to hear her with virtuosos, or _virtuosi_ rather. There was the
unanimous opinion that there was none to come up to her and suffice it
to say in a place of worship for music of a sacred character there was
a generally voiced desire for an encore. On the whole though favouring
preferably light opera of the _Don Giovanni_ description and _Martha_,
a gem in its line, he had a _penchant_, though with only a surface
knowledge, for the severe classical school such as Mendelssohn. And
talking of that, taking it for granted he knew all about the old
favourites, he mentioned _par excellence_ Lionel's air in _Martha,
M'appari_, which, curiously enough, he had heard or overheard, to be
more accurate, on yesterday, a privilege he keenly appreciated, from the
lips of Stephen's respected father, sung to perfection, a study of the
number, in fact, which made all the others take a back seat. Stephen, in
reply to a politely put query, said he didn't sing it but launched
out into praises of Shakespeare's songs, at least of in or about that
period, the lutenist Dowland who lived in Fetter lane near Gerard the
herbalist, who _anno ludendo hausi, Doulandus_, an instrument he was
contemplating purchasing from Mr Arnold Dolmetsch, whom B. did not quite
recall though the name certainly sounded familiar, for sixtyfive guineas
and Farnaby and son with their _dux_ and _comes_ conceits and Byrd
(William) who played the virginals, he said, in the Queen's chapel or
anywhere else he found them and one Tomkins who made toys or airs and
John Bull.

On the roadway which they were approaching whilst still speaking beyond
the swingchains a horse, dragging a sweeper, paced on the paven ground,
brushing a long swathe of mire up so that with the noise Bloom was not
perfectly certain whether he had caught aright the allusion to sixtyfive
guineas and John Bull. He inquired if it was John Bull the political
celebrity of that ilk, as it struck him, the two identical names, as a
striking coincidence.

By the chains the horse slowly swerved to turn, which perceiving, Bloom,
who was keeping a sharp lookout as usual, plucked the other's sleeve
gently, jocosely remarking:

--Our lives are in peril tonight. Beware of the steamroller.

They thereupon stopped. Bloom looked at the head of a horse not worth
anything like sixtyfive guineas, suddenly in evidence in the dark quite
near so that it seemed new, a different grouping of bones and even flesh
because palpably it was a fourwalker, a hipshaker, a blackbuttocker, a
taildangler, a headhanger putting his hind foot foremost the while the
lord of his creation sat on the perch, busy with his thoughts. But such
a good poor brute he was sorry he hadn't a lump of sugar but, as he
wisely reflected, you could scarcely be prepared for every emergency
that might crop up. He was just a big nervous foolish noodly kind of a
horse, without a second care in the world. But even a dog, he reflected,
take that mongrel in Barney Kiernan's, of the same size, would be a holy
horror to face. But it was no animal's fault in particular if he was
built that way like the camel, ship of the desert, distilling grapes
into potheen in his hump. Nine tenths of them all could be caged or
trained, nothing beyond the art of man barring the bees. Whale with a
harpoon hairpin, alligator tickle the small of his back and he sees the
joke, chalk a circle for a rooster, tiger my eagle eye. These timely
reflections anent the brutes of the field occupied his mind somewhat
distracted from Stephen's words while the ship of the street was
manoeuvring and Stephen went on about the highly interesting old.

--What's this I was saying? Ah, yes! My wife, he intimated, plunging
_in medias res_, would have the greatest of pleasure in making your
acquaintance as she is passionately attached to music of any kind.

He looked sideways in a friendly fashion at the sideface of Stephen,
image of his mother, which was not quite the same as the usual handsome
blackguard type they unquestionably had an insatiable hankering after as
he was perhaps not that way built.

Still, supposing he had his father's gift as he more than suspected,
it opened up new vistas in his mind such as Lady Fingall's Irish
industries, concert on the preceding Monday, and aristocracy in general.

Exquisite variations he was now describing on an air _Youth here has
End_ by Jans Pieter Sweelinck, a Dutchman of Amsterdam where the frows
come from. Even more he liked an old German song of _Johannes Jeep_
about the clear sea and the voices of sirens, sweet murderers of men,
which boggled Bloom a bit:

     _Von der Sirenen Listigkeit
     Tun die Poeten dichten._

These opening bars he sang and translated _extempore_. Bloom, nodding,
said he perfectly understood and begged him to go on by all means which
he did.

A phenomenally beautiful tenor voice like that, the rarest of boons,
which Bloom appreciated at the very first note he got out, could easily,
if properly handled by some recognised authority on voice production
such as Barraclough and being able to read music into the bargain,
command its own price where baritones were ten a penny and procure for
its fortunate possessor in the near future an _entrÃ©e_ into fashionable
houses in the best residential quarters of financial magnates in a large
way of business and titled people where with his university degree of
B. A. (a huge ad in its way) and gentlemanly bearing to all the more
influence the good impression he would infallibly score a distinct
success, being blessed with brains which also could be utilised for the
purpose and other requisites, if his clothes were properly attended
to so as to the better worm his way into their good graces as he, a
youthful tyro in--society's sartorial niceties, hardly understood how a
little thing like that could militate against you. It was in fact only a
matter of months and he could easily foresee him participating in their
musical and artistic _conversaziones_ during the festivities of the
Christmas season, for choice, causing a slight flutter in the dovecotes
of the fair sex and being made a lot of by ladies out for sensation,
cases of which, as he happened to know, were on record--in fact, without
giving the show away, he himself once upon a time, if he cared to, could
easily have. Added to which of course would be the pecuniary emolument
by no means to be sneezed at, going hand in hand with his tuition
fees. Not, he parenthesised, that for the sake of filthy lucre he need
necessarily embrace the lyric platform as a walk in life for any lengthy
space of time. But a step in the required direction it was beyond yea or
nay and both monetarily and mentally it contained no reflection on his
dignity in the smallest and it often turned in uncommonly handy to
be handed a cheque at a muchneeded moment when every little helped.
Besides, though taste latterly had deteriorated to a degree, original
music like that, different from the conventional rut, would rapidly
have a great vogue as it would be a decided novelty for Dublin's musical
world after the usual hackneyed run of catchy tenor solos foisted on a
confiding public by Ivan St Austell and Hilton St Just and their _genus
omne_. Yes, beyond a shadow of a doubt he could with all the cards in
his hand and he had a capital opening to make a name for himself and win
a high place in the city's esteem where he could command a stiff figure
and, booking ahead, give a grand concert for the patrons of the King
street house, given a backerup, if one were forthcoming to kick him
upstairs, so to speak, a big _if_, however, with some impetus of the
goahead sort to obviate the inevitable procrastination which often
tripped-up a too much fÃªted prince of good fellows. And it need not
detract from the other by one iota as, being his own master, he would
have heaps of time to practise literature in his spare moments when
desirous of so doing without its clashing with his vocal career or
containing anything derogatory whatsoever as it was a matter for himself
alone. In fact, he had the ball at his feet and that was the very reason
why the other, possessed of a remarkably sharp nose for smelling a rat
of any sort, hung on to him at all.

The horse was just then. And later on at a propitious opportunity he
purposed (Bloom did), without anyway prying into his private affairs on
the _fools step in where angels_ principle, advising him to sever his
connection with a certain budding practitioner who, he noticed, was
prone to disparage and even to a slight extent with some hilarious
pretext when not present, deprecate him, or whatever you like to call it
which in Bloom's humble opinion threw a nasty sidelight on that side of
a person's character, no pun intended.

The horse having reached the end of his tether, so to speak, halted and,
rearing high a proud feathering tail, added his quota by letting fall on
the floor which the brush would soon brush up and polish, three smoking
globes of turds. Slowly three times, one after another, from a full
crupper he mired. And humanely his driver waited till he (or she) had
ended, patient in his scythed car.

Side by side Bloom, profiting by the _contretemps_, with Stephen passed
through the gap of the chains, divided by the upright, and, stepping
over a strand of mire, went across towards Gardiner street lower,
Stephen singing more boldly, but not loudly, the end of the ballad.

_Und alle Schiffe brÃ¼cken._

The driver never said a word, good, bad or indifferent, but merely
watched the two figures, as he sat on his lowbacked car, both black,
one full, one lean, walk towards the railway bridge, _to be married by
Father Maher_. As they walked they at times stopped and walked again
continuing their _tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte_ (which, of course, he was utterly out
of) about sirens enemies of man's reason, mingled with a number of other
topics of the same category, usurpers, historical cases of the kind
while the man in the sweeper car or you might as well call it in the
sleeper car who in any case couldn't possibly hear because they were too
far simply sat in his seat near the end of lower Gardiner street _and
looked after their lowbacked car_.



What parallel courses did Bloom and Stephen follow returning?

Starting united both at normal walking pace from Beresford place they
followed in the order named Lower and Middle Gardiner streets and
Mountjoy square, west: then, at reduced pace, each bearing left,
Gardiner's place by an inadvertence as far as the farther corner of
Temple street: then, at reduced pace with interruptions of halt, bearing
right, Temple street, north, as far as Hardwicke place. Approaching,
disparate, at relaxed walking pace they crossed both the circus before
George's church diametrically, the chord in any circle being less than
the arc which it subtends.


Of what did the duumvirate deliberate during their itinerary?

Music, literature, Ireland, Dublin, Paris, friendship, woman,
prostitution, diet, the influence of gaslight or the light of arc and
glowlamps on the growth of adjoining paraheliotropic trees, exposed
corporation emergency dustbuckets, the Roman catholic church,
ecclesiastical celibacy, the Irish nation, jesuit education, careers,
the study of medicine, the past day, the maleficent influence of the
presabbath, Stephen's collapse.

Did Bloom discover common factors of similarity between their respective
like and unlike reactions to experience?

Both were sensitive to artistic impressions, musical in preference to
plastic or pictorial. Both preferred a continental to an insular manner
of life, a cisatlantic to a transatlantic place of residence. Both
indurated by early domestic training and an inherited tenacity of
heterodox resistance professed their disbelief in many orthodox
religious, national, social and ethical doctrines. Both admitted
the alternately stimulating and obtunding influence of heterosexual
magnetism.


Were their views on some points divergent?

Stephen dissented openly from Bloom's views on the importance of dietary
and civic selfhelp while Bloom dissented tacitly from Stephen's views
on the eternal affirmation of the spirit of man in literature. Bloom
assented covertly to Stephen's rectification of the anachronism
involved in assigning the date of the conversion of the Irish nation to
christianity from druidism by Patrick son of Calpornus, son of Potitus,
son of Odyssus, sent by pope Celestine I in the year 432 in the reign of
Leary to the year 260 or thereabouts in the reign of Cormac MacArt (died
266 A.D.), suffocated by imperfect deglutition of aliment at Sletty
and interred at Rossnaree. The collapse which Bloom ascribed to
gastric inanition and certain chemical compounds of varying degrees of
adulteration and alcoholic strength, accelerated by mental exertion and
the velocity of rapid circular motion in a relaxing atmosphere, Stephen
attributed to the reapparition of a matutinal cloud (perceived by both
from two different points of observation Sandycove and Dublin) at first
no bigger than a woman's hand.


Was there one point on which their views were equal and negative?

The influence of gaslight or electric light on the growth of adjoining
paraheliotropic trees.


Had Bloom discussed similar subjects during nocturnal perambulations in
the past?

In 1884 with Owen Goldberg and Cecil Turnbull at night on public
thoroughfares between Longwood avenue and Leonard's corner and Leonard's
corner and Synge street and Synge street and Bloomfield avenue.

In 1885 with Percy Apjohn in the evenings, reclined against the wall
between Gibraltar villa and Bloomfield house in Crumlin, barony
of Uppercross. In 1886 occasionally with casual acquaintances and
prospective purchasers on doorsteps, in front parlours, in third class
railway carriages of suburban lines. In 1888 frequently with major Brian
Tweedy and his daughter Miss Marion Tweedy, together and separately on
the lounge in Matthew Dillon's house in Roundtown. Once in 1892 and once
in 1893 with Julius (Juda) Mastiansky, on both occasions in the parlour
of his (Bloom's) house in Lombard street, west.


What reflection concerning the irregular sequence of dates 1884, 1885,
1886, 1888, 1892, 1893, 1904 did Bloom make before their arrival at
their destination?

He reflected that the progressive extension of the field of individual
development and experience was regressively accompanied by a restriction
of the converse domain of interindividual relations.


As in what ways?

From inexistence to existence he came to many and was as one received:
existence with existence he was with any as any with any: from existence
to nonexistence gone he would be by all as none perceived.

What act did Bloom make on their arrival at their destination?

At the housesteps of the 4th Of the equidifferent uneven numbers, number
7 Eccles street, he inserted his hand mechanically into the back pocket
of his trousers to obtain his latchkey.


Was it there?

It was in the corresponding pocket of the trousers which he had worn on
the day but one preceding.


Why was he doubly irritated?

Because he had forgotten and because he remembered that he had reminded
himself twice not to forget.


What were then the alternatives before the, premeditatedly
(respectively) and inadvertently, keyless couple?

To enter or not to enter. To knock or not to knock.


Bloom's decision?

A stratagem. Resting his feet on the dwarf wall, he climbed over the
area railings, compressed his hat on his head, grasped two points at
the lower union of rails and stiles, lowered his body gradually by its
length of five feet nine inches and a half to within two feet ten inches
of the area pavement and allowed his body to move freely in space by
separating himself from the railings and crouching in preparation for
the impact of the fall.


Did he fall?

By his body's known weight of eleven stone and four pounds in
avoirdupois measure, as certified by the graduated machine for
periodical selfweighing in the premises of Francis Froedman,
pharmaceutical chemist of 19 Frederick street, north, on the last feast
of the Ascension, to wit, the twelfth day of May of the bissextile year
one thousand nine hundred and four of the christian era (jewish era five
thousand six hundred and sixtyfour, mohammadan era one thousand three
hundred and twentytwo), golden number 5, epact 13, solar cycle 9,
dominical letters C B, Roman indiction 2, Julian period 6617, MCMIV.


Did he rise uninjured by concussion?

Regaining new stable equilibrium he rose uninjured though concussed by
the impact, raised the latch of the area door by the exertion of force
at its freely moving flange and by leverage of the first kind applied
at its fulcrum, gained retarded access to the kitchen through the
subadjacent scullery, ignited a lucifer match by friction, set free
inflammable coal gas by turningon the ventcock, lit a high flame which,
by regulating, he reduced to quiescent candescence and lit finally a
portable candle.


What discrete succession of images did Stephen meanwhile perceive?

Reclined against the area railings he perceived through the transparent
kitchen panes a man regulating a gasflame of 14 CP, a man lighting a
candle of 1 CP, a man removing in turn each of his two boots, a man
leaving the kitchen holding a candle.


Did the man reappear elsewhere?

After a lapse of four minutes the glimmer of his candle was discernible
through the semitransparent semicircular glass fanlight over the
halldoor. The halldoor turned gradually on its hinges. In the open space
of the doorway the man reappeared without his hat, with his candle.


Did Stephen obey his sign?

Yes, entering softly, he helped to close and chain the door and followed
softly along the hallway the man's back and listed feet and lighted
candle past a lighted crevice of doorway on the left and carefully down
a turning staircase of more than five steps into the kitchen of Bloom's
house.


What did Bloom do?

He extinguished the candle by a sharp expiration of breath upon its
flame, drew two spoonseat deal chairs to the hearthstone, one for
Stephen with its back to the area window, the other for himself when
necessary, knelt on one knee, composed in the grate a pyre of crosslaid
resintipped sticks and various coloured papers and irregular polygons
of best Abram coal at twentyone shillings a ton from the yard of Messrs
Flower and M'Donald of 14 D'Olier street, kindled it at three projecting
points of paper with one ignited lucifer match, thereby releasing
the potential energy contained in the fuel by allowing its carbon and
hydrogen elements to enter into free union with the oxygen of the air.


Of what similar apparitions did Stephen think?

Of others elsewhere in other times who, kneeling on one knee or on two,
had kindled fires for him, of Brother Michael in the infirmary of the
college of the Society of Jesus at Clongowes Wood, Sallins, in the
county of Kildare: of his father, Simon Dedalus, in an unfurnished room
of his first residence in Dublin, number thirteen Fitzgibbon street:
of his godmother Miss Kate Morkan in the house of her dying sister Miss
Julia Morkan at 15 Usher's Island: of his aunt Sara, wife of Richie
(Richard) Goulding, in the kitchen of their lodgings at 62 Clanbrassil
street: of his mother Mary, wife of Simon Dedalus, in the kitchen of
number twelve North Richmond street on the morning of the feast of
Saint Francis Xavier 1898: of the dean of studies, Father Butt, in the
physics' theatre of university College, 16 Stephen's Green, north: of
his sister Dilly (Delia) in his father's house in Cabra.


What did Stephen see on raising his gaze to the height of a yard from
the fire towards the opposite wall?

Under a row of five coiled spring housebells a curvilinear rope,
stretched between two holdfasts athwart across the recess beside the
chimney pier, from which hung four smallsized square handkerchiefs
folded unattached consecutively in adjacent rectangles and one pair of
ladies' grey hose with Lisle suspender tops and feet in their habitual
position clamped by three erect wooden pegs two at their outer
extremities and the third at their point of junction.


What did Bloom see on the range?

On the right (smaller) hob a blue enamelled saucepan: on the left
(larger) hob a black iron kettle.


What did Bloom do at the range?

He removed the saucepan to the left hob, rose and carried the iron
kettle to the sink in order to tap the current by turning the faucet to
let it flow.


Did it flow?

Yes. From Roundwood reservoir in county Wicklow of a cubic capacity of
2400 million gallons, percolating through a subterranean aqueduct of
filter mains of single and double pipeage constructed at an initial
plant cost of 5 pounds per linear yard by way of the Dargle, Rathdown,
Glen of the Downs and Callowhill to the 26 acre reservoir at Stillorgan,
a distance of 22 statute miles, and thence, through a system of
relieving tanks, by a gradient of 250 feet to the city boundary at
Eustace bridge, upper Leeson street, though from prolonged summer drouth
and daily supply of 12 1/2 million gallons the water had fallen below
the sill of the overflow weir for which reason the borough surveyor and
waterworks engineer, Mr Spencer Harty, C. E., on the instructions of
the waterworks committee had prohibited the use of municipal water for
purposes other than those of consumption (envisaging the possibility of
recourse being had to the impotable water of the Grand and Royal canals
as in 1893) particularly as the South Dublin Guardians, notwithstanding
their ration of 15 gallons per day per pauper supplied through a 6 inch
meter, had been convicted of a wastage of 20,000 gallons per night by
a reading of their meter on the affirmation of the law agent of
the corporation, Mr Ignatius Rice, solicitor, thereby acting to the
detriment of another section of the public, selfsupporting taxpayers,
solvent, sound.

What in water did Bloom, waterlover, drawer of water, watercarrier,
returning to the range, admire?

Its universality: its democratic equality and constancy to its nature
in seeking its own level: its vastness in the ocean of Mercator's
projection: its unplumbed profundity in the Sundam trench of the Pacific
exceeding 8000 fathoms: the restlessness of its waves and surface
particles visiting in turn all points of its seaboard: the independence
of its units: the variability of states of sea: its hydrostatic
quiescence in calm: its hydrokinetic turgidity in neap and spring tides:
its subsidence after devastation: its sterility in the circumpolar
icecaps, arctic and antarctic: its climatic and commercial significance:
its preponderance of 3 to 1 over the dry land of the globe: its
indisputable hegemony extending in square leagues over all the region
below the subequatorial tropic of Capricorn: the multisecular stability
of its primeval basin: its luteofulvous bed: its capacity to dissolve
and hold in solution all soluble substances including millions of
tons of the most precious metals: its slow erosions of peninsulas and
islands, its persistent formation of homothetic islands, peninsulas
and downwardtending promontories: its alluvial deposits: its weight and
volume and density: its imperturbability in lagoons and highland tarns:
its gradation of colours in the torrid and temperate and frigid zones:
its vehicular ramifications in continental lakecontained streams and
confluent oceanflowing rivers with their tributaries and transoceanic
currents, gulfstream, north and south equatorial courses: its violence
in seaquakes, waterspouts, Artesian wells, eruptions, torrents, eddies,
freshets, spates, groundswells, watersheds, waterpartings, geysers,
cataracts, whirlpools, maelstroms, inundations, deluges, cloudbursts:
its vast circumterrestrial ahorizontal curve: its secrecy in springs and
latent humidity, revealed by rhabdomantic or hygrometric instruments
and exemplified by the well by the hole in the wall at Ashtown
gate, saturation of air, distillation of dew: the simplicity of its
composition, two constituent parts of hydrogen with one constituent part
of oxygen: its healing virtues: its buoyancy in the waters of the Dead
Sea: its persevering penetrativeness in runnels, gullies, inadequate
dams, leaks on shipboard: its properties for cleansing, quenching thirst
and fire, nourishing vegetation: its infallibility as paradigm and
paragon: its metamorphoses as vapour, mist, cloud, rain, sleet, snow,
hail: its strength in rigid hydrants: its variety of forms in loughs
and bays and gulfs and bights and guts and lagoons and atolls and
archipelagos and sounds and fjords and minches and tidal estuaries and
arms of sea: its solidity in glaciers, icebergs, icefloes: its docility
in working hydraulic millwheels, turbines, dynamos, electric power
stations, bleachworks, tanneries, scutchmills: its utility in canals,
rivers, if navigable, floating and graving docks: its potentiality
derivable from harnessed tides or watercourses falling from level
to level: its submarine fauna and flora (anacoustic, photophobe),
numerically, if not literally, the inhabitants of the globe: its
ubiquity as constituting 90 percent of the human body: the noxiousness
of its effluvia in lacustrine marshes, pestilential fens, faded
flowerwater, stagnant pools in the waning moon.


Having set the halffilled kettle on the now burning coals, why did he
return to the stillflowing tap?

To wash his soiled hands with a partially consumed tablet of
Barrington's lemonflavoured soap, to which paper still adhered, (bought
thirteen hours previously for fourpence and still unpaid for), in fresh
cold neverchanging everchanging water and dry them, face and hands, in a
long redbordered holland cloth passed over a wooden revolving roller.


What reason did Stephen give for declining Bloom's offer?

That he was hydrophobe, hating partial contact by immersion or total by
submersion in cold water, (his last bath having taken place in the month
of October of the preceding year), disliking the aqueous substances of
glass and crystal, distrusting aquacities of thought and language.


What impeded Bloom from giving Stephen counsels of hygiene and
prophylactic to which should be added suggestions concerning a
preliminary wetting of the head and contraction of the muscles with
rapid splashing of the face and neck and thoracic and epigastric region
in case of sea or river bathing, the parts of the human anatomy most
sensitive to cold being the nape, stomach and thenar or sole of foot?

The incompatibility of aquacity with the erratic originality of genius.


What additional didactic counsels did he similarly repress?

Dietary: concerning the respective percentage of protein and caloric
energy in bacon, salt ling and butter, the absence of the former in the
lastnamed and the abundance of the latter in the firstnamed.


Which seemed to the host to be the predominant qualities of his guest?

Confidence in himself, an equal and opposite power of abandonment and
recuperation.


What concomitant phenomenon took place in the vessel of liquid by the
agency of fire?

The phenomenon of ebullition. Fanned by a constant updraught of
ventilation between the kitchen and the chimneyflue, ignition was
communicated from the faggots of precombustible fuel to polyhedral
masses of bituminous coal, containing in compressed mineral form the
foliated fossilised decidua of primeval forests which had in turn
derived their vegetative existence from the sun, primal source of heat
(radiant), transmitted through omnipresent luminiferous diathermanous
ether. Heat (convected), a mode of motion developed by such
combustion, was constantly and increasingly conveyed from the source
of calorification to the liquid contained in the vessel, being radiated
through the uneven unpolished dark surface of the metal iron, in part
reflected, in part absorbed, in part transmitted, gradually raising
the temperature of the water from normal to boiling point, a rise in
temperature expressible as the result of an expenditure of 72 thermal
units needed to raise 1 pound of water from 50 degrees to 212 degrees
Fahrenheit.


What announced the accomplishment of this rise in temperature?

A double falciform ejection of water vapour from under the kettlelid at
both sides simultaneously.


For what personal purpose could Bloom have applied the water so boiled?

To shave himself.


What advantages attended shaving by night?

A softer beard: a softer brush if intentionally allowed to remain from
shave to shave in its agglutinated lather: a softer skin if unexpectedly
encountering female acquaintances in remote places at incustomary hours:
quiet reflections upon the course of the day: a cleaner sensation when
awaking after a fresher sleep since matutinal noises, premonitions and
perturbations, a clattered milkcan, a postman's double knock, a paper
read, reread while lathering, relathering the same spot, a shock, a
shoot, with thought of aught he sought though fraught with nought might
cause a faster rate of shaving and a nick on which incision plaster with
precision cut and humected and applied adhered: which was to be done.


Why did absence of light disturb him less than presence of noise?

Because of the surety of the sense of touch in his firm full masculine
feminine passive active hand.


What quality did it (his hand) possess but with what counteracting
influence?

The operative surgical quality but that he was reluctant to shed human
blood even when the end justified the means, preferring, in their
natural order, heliotherapy, psychophysicotherapeutics, osteopathic
surgery.


What lay under exposure on the lower, middle and upper shelves of the
kitchen dresser, opened by Bloom?

On the lower shelf five vertical breakfast plates, six horizontal
breakfast saucers on which rested inverted breakfast cups, a
moustachecup, uninverted, and saucer of Crown Derby, four white
goldrimmed eggcups, an open shammy purse displaying coins, mostly
copper, and a phial of aromatic (violet) comfits. On the middle shelf
a chipped eggcup containing pepper, a drum of table salt, four
conglomerated black olives in oleaginous paper, an empty pot of
Plumtree's potted meat, an oval wicker basket bedded with fibre and
containing one Jersey pear, a halfempty bottle of William Gilbey and
Co's white invalid port, half disrobed of its swathe of coralpink tissue
paper, a packet of Epps's soluble cocoa, five ounces of Anne Lynch's
choice tea at 2/- per lb in a crinkled leadpaper bag, a cylindrical
canister containing the best crystallised lump sugar, two onions, one,
the larger, Spanish, entire, the other, smaller, Irish, bisected with
augmented surface and more redolent, a jar of Irish Model Dairy's cream,
a jug of brown crockery containing a naggin and a quarter of soured
adulterated milk, converted by heat into water, acidulous serum and
semisolidified curds, which added to the quantity subtracted for Mr
Bloom's and Mrs Fleming's breakfasts, made one imperial pint, the total
quantity originally delivered, two cloves, a halfpenny and a small dish
containing a slice of fresh ribsteak. On the upper shelf a battery of
jamjars (empty) of various sizes and proveniences.


What attracted his attention lying on the apron of the dresser?

Four polygonal fragments of two lacerated scarlet betting tickets,
numbered 8 87, 88 6.


What reminiscences temporarily corrugated his brow?

Reminiscences of coincidences, truth stranger than fiction,
preindicative of the result of the Gold Cup flat handicap, the official
and definitive result of which he had read in the _Evening Telegraph_,
late pink edition, in the cabman's shelter, at Butt bridge.


Where had previous intimations of the result, effected or projected,
been received by him?

In Bernard Kiernan's licensed premises 8, 9 and 10 little Britain
street: in David Byrne's licensed premises, 14 Duke street: in O'Connell
street lower, outside Graham Lemon's when a dark man had placed in
his hand a throwaway (subsequently thrown away), advertising Elijah,
restorer of the church in Zion: in Lincoln place outside the premises of
F. W. Sweny and Co (Limited), dispensing chemists, when, when Frederick
M. (Bantam) Lyons had rapidly and successively requested, perused and
restituted the copy of the current issue of the _Freeman's Journal and
National Press_ which he had been about to throw away (subsequently
thrown away), he had proceeded towards the oriental edifice of
the Turkish and Warm Baths, 11 Leinster street, with the light of
inspiration shining in his countenance and bearing in his arms the
secret of the race, graven in the language of prediction.

What qualifying considerations allayed his perturbations?

The difficulties of interpretation since the significance of any event
followed its occurrence as variably as the acoustic report followed the
electrical discharge and of counterestimating against an actual loss
by failure to interpret the total sum of possible losses proceeding
originally from a successful interpretation.


His mood?

He had not risked, he did not expect, he had not been disappointed, he
was satisfied.


What satisfied him?

To have sustained no positive loss. To have brought a positive gain to
others. Light to the gentiles.


How did Bloom prepare a collation for a gentile?

He poured into two teacups two level spoonfuls, four in all, of Epps's
soluble cocoa and proceeded according to the directions for use printed
on the label, to each adding after sufficient time for infusion the
prescribed ingredients for diffusion in the manner and in the quantity
prescribed.


What supererogatory marks of special hospitality did the host show his
guest?

Relinquishing his symposiarchal right to the moustache cup of imitation
Crown Derby presented to him by his only daughter, Millicent (Milly),
he substituted a cup identical with that of his guest and served
extraordinarily to his guest and, in reduced measure, to himself the
viscous cream ordinarily reserved for the breakfast of his wife Marion
(Molly).


Was the guest conscious of and did he acknowledge these marks of
hospitality?

His attention was directed to them by his host jocosely, and he accepted
them seriously as they drank in jocoserious silence Epps's massproduct,
the creature cocoa.


Were there marks of hospitality which he contemplated but suppressed,
reserving them for another and for himself on future occasions to
complete the act begun?

The reparation of a fissure of the length of 1 1/2 inches in the right
side of his guest's jacket. A gift to his guest of one of the four
lady's handkerchiefs, if and when ascertained to be in a presentable
condition.


Who drank more quickly?

Bloom, having the advantage of ten seconds at the initiation and taking,
from the concave surface of a spoon along the handle of which a steady
flow of heat was conducted, three sips to his opponent's one, six to
two, nine to three.


What cerebration accompanied his frequentative act?

Concluding by inspection but erroneously that his silent companion was
engaged in mental composition he reflected on the pleasures derived from
literature of instruction rather than of amusement as he himself had
applied to the works of William Shakespeare more than once for the
solution of difficult problems in imaginary or real life.


Had he found their solution?

In spite of careful and repeated reading of certain classical passages,
aided by a glossary, he had derived imperfect conviction from the text,
the answers not bearing in all points.


What lines concluded his first piece of original verse written by him,
potential poet, at the age of 11 in 1877 on the occasion of the offering
of three prizes of 10/-, 5/- and 2/6 respectively for competition by the
_Shamrock_, a weekly newspaper?

     _An ambition to squint
     At my verses in print
     Makes me hope that for these you'll find room?.
     If you so condescend
     Then please place at the end
     The name of yours truly, L. Bloom._

Did he find four separating forces between his temporary guest and him?

Name, age, race, creed.


What anagrams had he made on his name in youth?

     Leopold Bloom
     Ellpodbomool
     Molldopeloob
     Bollopedoom
     Old Ollebo, M. P.


What acrostic upon the abbreviation of his first name had he (kinetic
poet) sent to Miss Marion (Molly) Tweedy on the 14 February 1888?

     _Poets oft have sung in rhyme
     Of music sweet their praise divine.
     Let them hymn it nine times nine.
     Dearer far than song or wine.
     You are mine. The world is mine._


What had prevented him from completing a topical song (music by R. G.
Johnston) on the events of the past, or fixtures for the actual, years,
entitled _If Brian Boru could but come back and see old Dublin now_,
commissioned by Michael Gunn, lessee of the Gaiety Theatre, 46, 47, 48,
49 South King street, and to be introduced into the sixth scene, the
valley of diamonds, of the second edition (30 January 1893) of the grand
annual Christmas pantomime _Sinbad the Sailor_ (produced by R Shelton
26 December 1892, written by Greenleaf Whittier, scenery by George
A. Jackson and Cecil Hicks, costumes by Mrs and Miss Whelan under
the personal supervision of Mrs Michael Gunn, ballets by Jessie Noir,
harlequinade by Thomas Otto) and sung by Nelly Bouverist, principal
girl?

Firstly, oscillation between events of imperial and of local interest,
the anticipated diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria (born 1820, acceded
1837) and the posticipated opening of the new municipal fish market:
secondly, apprehension of opposition from extreme circles on the
questions of the respective visits of Their Royal Highnesses the
duke and duchess of York (real) and of His Majesty King Brian Boru
(imaginary): thirdly, a conflict between professional etiquette and
professional emulation concerning the recent erections of the Grand
Lyric Hall on Burgh Quay and the Theatre Royal in Hawkins street:
fourthly, distraction resultant from compassion for Nelly Bouverist's
non-intellectual, non-political, non-topical expression of countenance
and concupiscence caused by Nelly Bouverist's revelations of white
articles of non-intellectual, non-political, non-topical underclothing
while she (Nelly Bouverist) was in the articles: fifthly, the
difficulties of the selection of appropriate music and humorous
allusions from _Everybody's Book of Jokes_ (1000 pages and a laugh in
every one): sixthly, the rhymes, homophonous and cacophonous, associated
with the names of the new lord mayor, Daniel Tallon, the new high
sheriff, Thomas Pile and the new solicitorgeneral, Dunbar Plunket
Barton.


What relation existed between their ages?

16 years before in 1888 when Bloom was of Stephen's present age Stephen
was 6. 16 years after in 1920 when Stephen would be of Bloom's present
age Bloom would be 54. In 1936 when Bloom would be 70 and Stephen 54
their ages initially in the ratio of 16 to 0 would be as 17 1/2 to 13
1/2, the proportion increasing and the disparity diminishing according
as arbitrary future years were added, for if the proportion existing in
1883 had continued immutable, conceiving that to be possible, till then
1904 when Stephen was 22 Bloom would be 374 and in 1920 when Stephen
would be 38, as Bloom then was, Bloom would be 646 while in 1952 when
Stephen would have attained the maximum postdiluvian age of 70 Bloom,
being 1190 years alive having been born in the year 714, would have
surpassed by 221 years the maximum antediluvian age, that of Methusalah,
969 years, while, if Stephen would continue to live until he would
attain that age in the year 3072 A.D., Bloom would have been obliged to
have been alive 83,300 years, having been obliged to have been born in
the year 81,396 B.C.


What events might nullify these calculations?

The cessation of existence of both or either, the inauguration of a
new era or calendar, the annihilation of the world and consequent
extermination of the human species, inevitable but impredictable.


How many previous encounters proved their preexisting acquaintance?

Two. The first in the lilacgarden of Matthew Dillon's house, Medina
Villa, Kimmage road, Roundtown, in 1887, in the company of Stephen's
mother, Stephen being then of the age of 5 and reluctant to give his
hand in salutation. The second in the coffeeroom of Breslin's hotel on a
rainy Sunday in the January of 1892, in the company of Stephen's father
and Stephen's granduncle, Stephen being then 5 years older.


Did Bloom accept the invitation to dinner given then by the son and
afterwards seconded by the father?

Very gratefully, with grateful appreciation, with sincere appreciative
gratitude, in appreciatively grateful sincerity of regret, he declined.


Did their conversation on the subject of these reminiscences reveal a
third connecting link between them?

Mrs Riordan (Dante), a widow of independent means, had resided in the
house of Stephen's parents from 1 September 1888 to 29 December 1891 and
had also resided during the years 1892, 1893 and 1894 in the City Arms
Hotel owned by Elizabeth O'Dowd of 54 Prussia street where, during parts
of the years 1893 and 1894, she had been a constant informant of Bloom
who resided also in the same hotel, being at that time a clerk in the
employment of Joseph Cuffe of 5 Smithfield for the superintendence of
sales in the adjacent Dublin Cattle market on the North Circular road.


Had he performed any special corporal work of mercy for her?

He had sometimes propelled her on warm summer evenings, an infirm widow
of independent, if limited, means, in her convalescent bathchair
with slow revolutions of its wheels as far as the corner of the North
Circular road opposite Mr Gavin Low's place of business where she had
remained for a certain time scanning through his onelensed binocular
fieldglasses unrecognisable citizens on tramcars, roadster bicycles
equipped with inflated pneumatic tyres, hackney carriages, tandems,
private and hired landaus, dogcarts, ponytraps and brakes passing from
the city to the Phoenix Park and vice versa.


Why could he then support that his vigil with the greater equanimity?

Because in middle youth he had often sat observing through a rondel
of bossed glass of a multicoloured pane the spectacle offered with
continual changes of the thoroughfare without, pedestrians, quadrupeds,
velocipedes, vehicles, passing slowly, quickly, evenly, round and round
and round the rim of a round and round precipitous globe.


What distinct different memories had each of her now eight years
deceased?

The older, her bezique cards and counters, her Skye terrier, her
suppositious wealth, her lapses of responsiveness and incipient
catarrhal deafness: the younger, her lamp of colza oil before the statue
of the Immaculate Conception, her green and maroon brushes for Charles
Stewart Parnell and for Michael Davitt, her tissue papers.


Were there no means still remaining to him to achieve the rejuvenation
which these reminiscences divulged to a younger companion rendered the
more desirable?

The indoor exercises, formerly intermittently practised, subsequently
abandoned, prescribed in Eugen Sandow's _Physical Strength and How to
Obtain It_ which, designed particularly for commercial men engaged in
sedentary occupations, were to be made with mental concentration in
front of a mirror so as to bring into play the various families of
muscles and produce successively a pleasant rigidity, a more pleasant
relaxation and the most pleasant repristination of juvenile agility.


Had any special agility been his in earlier youth?

Though ringweight lifting had been beyond his strength and the full
circle gyration beyond his courage yet as a High school scholar he
had excelled in his stable and protracted execution of the half lever
movement on the parallel bars in consequence of his abnormally developed
abdominal muscles.


Did either openly allude to their racial difference?

Neither.


What, reduced to their simplest reciprocal form, were Bloom's thoughts
about Stephen's thoughts about Bloom and about Stephen's thoughts about
Bloom's thoughts about Stephen?

He thought that he thought that he was a jew whereas he knew that he
knew that he knew that he was not.


What, the enclosures of reticence removed, were their respective
parentages?

Bloom, only born male transubstantial heir of Rudolf Virag (subsequently
Rudolph Bloom) of Szombathely, Vienna, Budapest, Milan, London and
Dublin and of Ellen Higgins, second daughter of Julius Higgins (born
Karoly) and Fanny Higgins (born Hegarty). Stephen, eldest surviving male
consubstantial heir of Simon Dedalus of Cork and Dublin and of Mary,
daughter of Richard and Christina Goulding (born Grier).


Had Bloom and Stephen been baptised, and where and by whom, cleric or
layman?

Bloom (three times), by the reverend Mr Gilmer Johnston M. A., alone,
in the protestant church of Saint Nicholas Without, Coombe, by James
O'Connor, Philip Gilligan and James Fitzpatrick, together, under a pump
in the village of Swords, and by the reverend Charles Malone C. C., in
the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar. Stephen (once) by the reverend
Charles Malone C. C., alone, in the church of the Three Patrons,
Rathgar.


Did they find their educational careers similar?

Substituting Stephen for Bloom Stoom would have passed successively
through a dame's school and the high school. Substituting Bloom for
Stephen Blephen would have passed successively through the preparatory,
junior, middle and senior grades of the intermediate and through the
matriculation, first arts, second arts and arts degree courses of the
royal university.


Why did Bloom refrain from stating that he had frequented the university
of life?

Because of his fluctuating incertitude as to whether this observation
had or had not been already made by him to Stephen or by Stephen to him.


What two temperaments did they individually represent?

The scientific. The artistic.


What proofs did Bloom adduce to prove that his tendency was towards
applied, rather than towards pure, science?

Certain possible inventions of which he had cogitated when reclining
in a state of supine repletion to aid digestion, stimulated by his
appreciation of the importance of inventions now common but once
revolutionary, for example, the aeronautic parachute, the reflecting
telescope, the spiral corkscrew, the safety pin, the mineral water
siphon, the canal lock with winch and sluice, the suction pump.


Were these inventions principally intended for an improved scheme of
kindergarten?

Yes, rendering obsolete popguns, elastic airbladders, games of hazard,
catapults. They comprised astronomical kaleidoscopes exhibiting the
twelve constellations of the zodiac from Aries to Pisces, miniature
mechanical orreries, arithmetical gelatine lozenges, geometrical
to correspond with zoological biscuits, globemap playing balls,
historically costumed dolls.


What also stimulated him in his cogitations?

The financial success achieved by Ephraim Marks and Charles A. James,
the former by his 1d bazaar at 42 George's street, south, the latter
at his 6 1/2d shop and world's fancy fair and waxwork exhibition at 30
Henry street, admission 2d, children 1d: and the infinite possibilities
hitherto unexploited of the modern art of advertisement if condensed
in triliteral monoideal symbols, vertically of maximum visibility
(divined), horizontally of maximum legibility (deciphered) and of
magnetising efficacy to arrest involuntary attention, to interest, to
convince, to decide.


Such as?

K. II. Kino's 11/- Trousers. House of Keys. Alexander J. Keyes.


Such as not?

Look at this long candle. Calculate when it burns out and you receive
gratis 1 pair of our special non-compo boots, guaranteed 1 candle power.
Address: Barclay and Cook, 18 Talbot street.

Bacilikil (Insect Powder). Veribest (Boot Blacking). Uwantit (Combined
pocket twoblade penknife with corkscrew, nailfile and pipecleaner).


Such as never?

What is home without Plumtree's Potted Meat?

Incomplete.

With it an abode of bliss.

Manufactured by George Plumtree, 23 Merchants' quay, Dublin, put up in
4 oz pots, and inserted by Councillor Joseph P. Nannetti, M. P., Rotunda
Ward, 19 Hardwicke street, under the obituary notices and anniversaries
of deceases. The name on the label is Plumtree. A plumtree in a meatpot,
registered trade mark. Beware of imitations. Peatmot. Trumplee. Moutpat.
Plamtroo.


Which example did he adduce to induce Stephen to deduce that
originality, though producing its own reward, does not invariably
conduce to success?

His own ideated and rejected project of an illuminated showcart, drawn
by a beast of burden, in which two smartly dressed girls were to be
seated engaged in writing.


What suggested scene was then constructed by Stephen?

Solitary hotel in mountain pass. Autumn. Twilight. Fire lit. In dark
corner young man seated. Young woman enters. Restless. Solitary. She
sits. She goes to window. She stands. She sits. Twilight. She thinks.
On solitary hotel paper she writes. She thinks. She writes. She sighs.
Wheels and hoofs. She hurries out. He comes from his dark corner. He
seizes solitary paper. He holds it towards fire. Twilight. He reads.
Solitary.


What?

In sloping, upright and backhands: Queen's Hotel, Queen's Hotel, Queen's
Hotel. Queen's Ho...


What suggested scene was then reconstructed by Bloom?

The Queen's Hotel, Ennis, county Clare, where Rudolph Bloom (Rudolf
Virag) died on the evening of the 27 June 1886, at some hour unstated,
in consequence of an overdose of monkshood (aconite) selfadministered in
the form of a neuralgic liniment composed of 2 parts of aconite liniment
to I of chloroform liniment (purchased by him at 10.20 a.m. on the
morning of 27 June 1886 at the medical hall of Francis Dennehy, 17
Church street, Ennis) after having, though not in consequence of having,
purchased at 3.15 p.m. on the afternoon of 27 June 1886 a new boater
straw hat, extra smart (after having, though not in consequence of
having, purchased at the hour and in the place aforesaid, the toxin
aforesaid), at the general drapery store of James Cullen, 4 Main street,
Ennis.


Did he attribute this homonymity to information or coincidence or
intuition?

Coincidence.


Did he depict the scene verbally for his guest to see?

He preferred himself to see another's face and listen to another's
words by which potential narration was realised and kinetic temperament
relieved.


Did he see only a second coincidence in the second scene narrated to
him, described by the narrator as _A Pisgah Sight of Palestine or The
Parable of the Plums_?

It, with the preceding scene and with others unnarrated but existent by
implication, to which add essays on various subjects or moral apothegms
(e.g. _My Favourite Hero or Procrastination is the Thief of Time_)
composed during schoolyears, seemed to him to contain in itself and
in conjunction with the personal equation certain possibilities of
financial, social, personal and sexual success, whether specially
collected and selected as model pedagogic themes (of cent per cent
merit) for the use of preparatory and junior grade students or
contributed in printed form, following the precedent of Philip Beaufoy
or Doctor Dick or Heblon's _Studies in Blue_, to a publication of
certified circulation and solvency or employed verbally as intellectual
stimulation for sympathetic auditors, tacitly appreciative of successful
narrative and confidently augurative of successful achievement, during
the increasingly longer nights gradually following the summer solstice
on the day but three following, videlicet, Tuesday, 21 June (S. Aloysius
Gonzaga), sunrise 3.33 a.m., sunset 8.29 p.m.


Which domestic problem as much as, if not more than, any other
frequently engaged his mind?

What to do with our wives.


What had been his hypothetical singular solutions?

Parlour games (dominos, halma, tiddledywinks, spilikins, cup and ball,
nap, spoil five, bezique, twentyfive, beggar my neighbour, draughts,
chess or backgammon): embroidery, darning or knitting for the
policeaided clothing society: musical duets, mandoline and guitar, piano
and flute, guitar and piano: legal scrivenery or envelope addressing:
biweekly visits to variety entertainments: commercial activity as
pleasantly commanding and pleasingly obeyed mistress proprietress in
a cool dairy shop or warm cigar divan: the clandestine satisfaction of
erotic irritation in masculine brothels, state inspected and medically
controlled: social visits, at regular infrequent prevented intervals
and with regular frequent preventive superintendence, to and from female
acquaintances of recognised respectability in the vicinity: courses of
evening instruction specially designed to render liberal instruction
agreeable.


What instances of deficient mental development in his wife inclined him
in favour of the lastmentioned (ninth) solution?

In disoccupied moments she had more than once covered a sheet of paper
with signs and hieroglyphics which she stated were Greek and Irish and
Hebrew characters. She had interrogated constantly at varying intervals
as to the correct method of writing the capital initial of the name of
a city in Canada, Quebec. She understood little of political
complications, internal, or balance of power, external. In calculating
the addenda of bills she frequently had recourse to digital aid.
After completion of laconic epistolary compositions she abandoned
the implement of calligraphy in the encaustic pigment, exposed to
the corrosive action of copperas, green vitriol and nutgall. Unusual
polysyllables of foreign origin she interpreted phonetically or by false
analogy or by both: metempsychosis (met him pike hoses), _alias_ (a
mendacious person mentioned in sacred scripture).


What compensated in the false balance of her intelligence for these and
such deficiencies of judgment regarding persons, places and things?

The false apparent parallelism of all perpendicular arms of all
balances, proved true by construction. The counterbalance of her
proficiency of judgment regarding one person, proved true by experiment.


How had he attempted to remedy this state of comparative ignorance?

Variously. By leaving in a conspicuous place a certain book open at a
certain page: by assuming in her, when alluding explanatorily, latent
knowledge: by open ridicule in her presence of some absent other's
ignorant lapse.


With what success had he attempted direct instruction?

She followed not all, a part of the whole, gave attention with interest
comprehended with surprise, with care repeated, with greater difficulty
remembered, forgot with ease, with misgiving reremembered, rerepeated
with error.


What system had proved more effective?

Indirect suggestion implicating selfinterest.


Example?

She disliked umbrella with rain, he liked woman with umbrella, she
disliked new hat with rain, he liked woman with new hat, he bought new
hat with rain, she carried umbrella with new hat.


Accepting the analogy implied in his guest's parable which examples of
postexilic eminence did he adduce?

Three seekers of the pure truth, Moses of Egypt, Moses Maimonides,
author of _More Nebukim_ (Guide of the Perplexed) and Moses Mendelssohn
of such eminence that from Moses (of Egypt) to Moses (Mendelssohn) there
arose none like Moses (Maimonides).


What statement was made, under correction, by Bloom concerning a fourth
seeker of pure truth, by name Aristotle, mentioned, with permission, by
Stephen?

That the seeker mentioned had been a pupil of a rabbinical philosopher,
name uncertain.


Were other anapocryphal illustrious sons of the law and children of a
selected or rejected race mentioned?

Felix Bartholdy Mendelssohn (composer), Baruch Spinoza (philosopher),
Mendoza (pugilist), Ferdinand Lassalle (reformer, duellist).


What fragments of verse from the ancient Hebrew and ancient Irish
languages were cited with modulations of voice and translation of texts
by guest to host and by host to guest?

By Stephen: _suil, suil, suil arun, suil go siocair agus suil go cuin_
(walk, walk, walk your way, walk in safety, walk with care).


By Bloom: _Kkifeloch, harimon rakatejch m'baad l'zamatejch_ (thy temple
amid thy hair is as a slice of pomegranate).


How was a glyphic comparison of the phonic symbols of both languages
made in substantiation of the oral comparison?

By juxtaposition. On the penultimate blank page of a book of inferior
literary style, entituled _Sweets of Sin_ (produced by Bloom and so
manipulated that its front cover came in contact with the surface of
the table) with a pencil (supplied by Stephen) Stephen wrote the Irish
characters for gee, eh, dee, em, simple and modified, and Bloom in turn
wrote the Hebrew characters ghimel, aleph, daleth and (in the absence of
mem) a substituted qoph, explaining their arithmetical values as ordinal
and cardinal numbers, videlicet 3, 1, 4, and 100.


Was the knowledge possessed by both of each of these languages, the
extinct and the revived, theoretical or practical?

Theoretical, being confined to certain grammatical rules of accidence
and syntax and practically excluding vocabulary.


What points of contact existed between these languages and between the
peoples who spoke them?

The presence of guttural sounds, diacritic aspirations, epenthetic and
servile letters in both languages: their antiquity, both having been
taught on the plain of Shinar 242 years after the deluge in the seminary
instituted by Fenius Farsaigh, descendant of Noah, progenitor of Israel,
and ascendant of Heber and Heremon, progenitors of Ireland: their
archaeological, genealogical, hagiographical, exegetical, homiletic,
toponomastic, historical and religious literatures comprising the works
of rabbis and culdees, Torah, Talmud (Mischna and Ghemara), Massor,
Pentateuch, Book of the Dun Cow, Book of Ballymote, Garland of Howth,
Book of Kells: their dispersal, persecution, survival and revival: the
isolation of their synagogical and ecclesiastical rites in ghetto (S.
Mary's Abbey) and masshouse (Adam and Eve's tavern): the proscription
of their national costumes in penal laws and jewish dress acts: the
restoration in Chanah David of Zion and the possibility of Irish
political autonomy or devolution.


What anthem did Bloom chant partially in anticipation of that multiple,
ethnically irreducible consummation?

     _Kolod balejwaw pnimah
     Nefesch, jehudi, homijah._


Why was the chant arrested at the conclusion of this first distich?

In consequence of defective mnemotechnic.


How did the chanter compensate for this deficiency?

By a periphrastic version of the general text.


In what common study did their mutual reflections merge?

The increasing simplification traceable from the Egyptian epigraphic
hieroglyphs to the Greek and Roman alphabets and the anticipation of
modern stenography and telegraphic code in the cuneiform inscriptions
(Semitic) and the virgular quinquecostate ogham writing (Celtic). Did
the guest comply with his host's request?

Doubly, by appending his signature in Irish and Roman characters.

What was Stephen's auditive sensation?

He heard in a profound ancient male unfamiliar melody the accumulation
of the past.


What was Bloom's visual sensation?

He saw in a quick young male familiar form the predestination of a
future.


What were Stephen's and Bloom's quasisimultaneous volitional
quasisensations of concealed identities?

Visually, Stephen's: The traditional figure of hypostasis, depicted
by Johannes Damascenus, Lentulus Romanus and Epiphanius Monachus as
leucodermic, sesquipedalian with winedark hair. Auditively, Bloom's: The
traditional accent of the ecstasy of catastrophe.


What future careers had been possible for Bloom in the past and with
what exemplars?

In the church, Roman, Anglican or Nonconformist: exemplars, the very
reverend John Conmee S. J., the reverend T. Salmon, D. D., provost of
Trinity college, Dr Alexander J. Dowie. At the bar, English or Irish:
exemplars, Seymour Bushe, K. C., Rufus Isaacs, K. C. On the stage modern
or Shakespearean: exemplars, Charles Wyndham, high comedian Osmond
Tearle (died 1901), exponent of Shakespeare.


Did the host encourage his guest to chant in a modulated voice a strange
legend on an allied theme?

Reassuringly, their place, where none could hear them talk, being
secluded, reassured, the decocted beverages, allowing for subsolid
residual sediment of a mechanical mixture, water plus sugar plus cream
plus cocoa, having been consumed.


Recite the first (major) part of this chanted legend.

     _Little Harry Hughes and his schoolfellows all
     Went out for to play ball.
     And the very first ball little Harry Hughes played
     He drove it o'er the jew's garden wall.
     And the very second ball little Harry Hughes played
     He broke the jew's windows all._



How did the son of Rudolph receive this first part?


With unmixed feeling. Smiling, a jew he heard with pleasure and saw the
unbroken kitchen window.


Recite the second part (minor) of the legend.

     _Then out there came the jew's daughter
     And she all dressed in green.
     "Come back, come back, you pretty little boy,
     And play your ball again."

     "I can't come back and I won't come back
     Without my schoolfellows all.
     For if my master he did hear
     He'd make it a sorry ball."

     She took him by the lilywhite hand
     And led him along the hall
     Until she led him to a room
     Where none could hear him call.

     She took a penknife out of her pocket
     And cut off his little head.
     And now he'll play his ball no more
     For he lies among the dead._


How did the father of Millicent receive this second part?

With mixed feelings. Unsmiling, he heard and saw with wonder a jew's
daughter, all dressed in green.


Condense Stephen's commentary.

One of all, the least of all, is the victim predestined. Once by
inadvertence twice by design he challenges his destiny. It comes when he
is abandoned and challenges him reluctant and, as an apparition of hope
and youth, holds him unresisting. It leads him to a strange habitation,
to a secret infidel apartment, and there, implacable, immolates him,
consenting.


Why was the host (victim predestined) sad?

He wished that a tale of a deed should be told of a deed not by him
should by him not be told.


Why was the host (reluctant, unresisting) still?

In accordance with the law of the conservation of energy.


Why was the host (secret infidel) silent?

He weighed the possible evidences for and against ritual murder: the
incitations of the hierarchy, the superstition of the populace, the
propagation of rumour in continued fraction of veridicity, the envy of
opulence, the influence of retaliation, the sporadic reappearance of
atavistic delinquency, the mitigating circumstances of fanaticism,
hypnotic suggestion and somnambulism.


From which (if any) of these mental or physical disorders was he not
totally immune?

From hypnotic suggestion: once, waking, he had not recognised his
sleeping apartment: more than once, waking, he had been for an
indefinite time incapable of moving or uttering sounds. From
somnambulism: once, sleeping, his body had risen, crouched and
crawled in the direction of a heatless fire and, having attained
its destination, there, curled, unheated, in night attire had lain,
sleeping.


Had this latter or any cognate phenomenon declared itself in any member
of his family?

Twice, in Holles street and in Ontario terrace, his daughter Millicent
(Milly) at the ages of 6 and 8 years had uttered in sleep an exclamation
of terror and had replied to the interrogations of two figures in night
attire with a vacant mute expression.


What other infantile memories had he of her?

15 June 1889. A querulous newborn female infant crying to cause and
lessen congestion. A child renamed Padney Socks she shook with shocks
her moneybox: counted his three free moneypenny buttons, one, tloo,
tlee: a doll, a boy, a sailor she cast away: blond, born of two dark,
she had blond ancestry, remote, a violation, Herr Hauptmann Hainau,
Austrian army, proximate, a hallucination, lieutenant Mulvey, British
navy.


What endemic characteristics were present?

Conversely the nasal and frontal formation was derived in a direct
line of lineage which, though interrupted, would continue at distant
intervals to more distant intervals to its most distant intervals.


What memories had he of her adolescence?

She relegated her hoop and skippingrope to a recess. On the duke's lawn,
entreated by an English visitor, she declined to permit him to make and
take away her photographic image (objection not stated). On the South
Circular road in the company of Elsa Potter, followed by an individual
of sinister aspect, she went half way down Stamer street and turned
abruptly back (reason of change not stated). On the vigil of the 15th
anniversary of her birth she wrote a letter from Mullingar, county
Westmeath, making a brief allusion to a local student (faculty and year
not stated).


Did that first division, portending a second division, afflict him?

Less than he had imagined, more than he had hoped.


What second departure was contemporaneously perceived by him similarly,
if differently?

A temporary departure of his cat.


Why similarly, why differently?

Similarly, because actuated by a secret purpose the quest of a new male

(Mullingar student) or of a healing herb (valerian). Differently,
because of different possible returns to the inhabitants or to the
habitation.


In other respects were their differences similar?

In passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in
unexpectedness.


As?

Inasmuch as leaning she sustained her blond hair for him to ribbon it
for her (cf neckarching cat). Moreover, on the free surface of the lake
in Stephen's green amid inverted reflections of trees her uncommented
spit, describing concentric circles of waterrings, indicated by the
constancy of its permanence the locus of a somnolent prostrate fish (cf
mousewatching cat).

Again, in order to remember the date, combatants, issue and consequences
of a famous military engagement she pulled a plait of her hair (cf
earwashing cat). Furthermore, silly Milly, she dreamed of having had
an unspoken unremembered conversation with a horse whose name had been
Joseph to whom (which) she had offered a tumblerful of lemonade which
it (he) had appeared to have accepted (cf hearthdreaming cat). Hence, in
passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in unexpectedness,
their differences were similar.


In what way had he utilised gifts (1) an owl, (2) a clock, given as
matrimonial auguries, to interest and to instruct her?

As object lessons to explain: 1) the nature and habits of oviparous
animals, the possibility of aerial flight, certain abnormalities of
vision, the secular process of imbalsamation: 2) the principle of the
pendulum, exemplified in bob, wheelgear and regulator, the translation
in terms of human or social regulation of the various positions of
clockwise moveable indicators on an unmoving dial, the exactitude of the
recurrence per hour of an instant in each hour when the longer and the
shorter indicator were at the same angle of inclination, _videlicet_, 5
5/11 minutes past each hour per hour in arithmetical progression.


In what manners did she reciprocate?

She remembered: on the 27th anniversary of his birth she presented to
him a breakfast moustachecup of imitation Crown Derby porcelain ware.
She provided: at quarter day or thereabouts if or when purchases
had been made by him not for her she showed herself attentive to his
necessities, anticipating his desires. She admired: a natural phenomenon
having been explained by him to her she expressed the immediate desire
to possess without gradual acquisition a fraction of his science, the
moiety, the quarter, a thousandth part.


What proposal did Bloom, diambulist, father of Milly, somnambulist, make
to Stephen, noctambulist?

To pass in repose the hours intervening between Thursday (proper) and
Friday (normal) on an extemporised cubicle in the apartment immediately
above the kitchen and immediately adjacent to the sleeping apartment of
his host and hostess.


What various advantages would or might have resulted from a prolongation
of such an extemporisation?

For the guest: security of domicile and seclusion of study. For the
host: rejuvenation of intelligence, vicarious satisfaction. For the
hostess: disintegration of obsession, acquisition of correct Italian
pronunciation.


Why might these several provisional contingencies between a guest and
a hostess not necessarily preclude or be precluded by a permanent
eventuality of reconciliatory union between a schoolfellow and a jew's
daughter?

Because the way to daughter led through mother, the way to mother
through daughter.


To what inconsequent polysyllabic question of his host did the guest
return a monosyllabic negative answer?

If he had known the late Mrs Emily Sinico, accidentally killed at Sydney
Parade railway station, 14 October 1903.


What inchoate corollary statement was consequently suppressed by the
host?

A statement explanatory of his absence on the occasion of the interment
of Mrs Mary Dedalus (born Goulding), 26 June 1903, vigil of the
anniversary of the decease of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag).


Was the proposal of asylum accepted?

Promptly, inexplicably, with amicability, gratefully it was declined.
What exchange of money took place between host and guest?

The former returned to the latter, without interest, a sum of money
(1-7-0), one pound seven shillings sterling, advanced by the latter to
the former.


What counterproposals were alternately advanced, accepted, modified,
declined, restated in other terms, reaccepted, ratified, reconfirmed?

To inaugurate a prearranged course of Italian instruction, place
the residence of the instructed. To inaugurate a course of vocal
instruction, place the residence of the instructress. To inaugurate
a series of static semistatic and peripatetic intellectual dialogues,
places the residence of both speakers (if both speakers were resident in
the same place), the Ship hotel and tavern, 6 Lower Abbey street (W. and
E. Connery, proprietors), the National Library of Ireland, 10 Kildare
street, the National Maternity Hospital, 29, 30 and 31 Holles street, a
public garden, the vicinity of a place of worship, a conjunction of two
or more public thoroughfares, the point of bisection of a right line
drawn between their residences (if both speakers were resident in
different places).


What rendered problematic for Bloom the realisation of these mutually
selfexcluding propositions?

The irreparability of the past: once at a performance of Albert
Hengler's circus in the Rotunda, Rutland square, Dublin, an intuitive
particoloured clown in quest of paternity had penetrated from the ring
to a place in the auditorium where Bloom, solitary, was seated and had
publicly declared to an exhilarated audience that he (Bloom) was his
(the clown's) papa. The imprevidibility of the future: once in the
summer of 1898 he (Bloom) had marked a florin (2/-) with three notches
on the milled edge and tendered it m payment of an account due to and
received by J. and T. Davy, family grocers, 1 Charlemont Mall, Grand
Canal, for circulation on the waters of civic finance, for possible,
circuitous or direct, return.


Was the clown Bloom's son?

No.


Had Bloom's coin returned?

Never.


Why would a recurrent frustration the more depress him?

Because at the critical turningpoint of human existence he desired to
amend many social conditions, the product of inequality and avarice and
international animosity. He believed then that human life was infinitely
perfectible, eliminating these conditions?

There remained the generic conditions imposed by natural, as distinct
from human law, as integral parts of the human whole: the necessity of
destruction to procure alimentary sustenance: the painful character of
the ultimate functions of separate existence, the agonies of birth and
death: the monotonous menstruation of simian and (particularly) human
females extending from the age of puberty to the menopause: inevitable
accidents at sea, in mines and factories: certain very painful maladies
and their resultant surgical operations, innate lunacy and congenital
criminality, decimating epidemics: catastrophic cataclysms which make
terror the basis of human mentality: seismic upheavals the epicentres
of which are located in densely populated regions: the fact of vital
growth, through convulsions of metamorphosis, from infancy through
maturity to decay.


Why did he desist from speculation?

Because it was a task for a superior intelligence to substitute other
more acceptable phenomena in the place of the less acceptable phenomena
to be removed.


Did Stephen participate in his dejection?

He affirmed his significance as a conscious rational animal proceeding
syllogistically from the known to the unknown and a conscious rational
reagent between a micro and a macrocosm ineluctably constructed upon the
incertitude of the void.


Was this affirmation apprehended by Bloom?

Not verbally. Substantially.


What comforted his misapprehension?

That as a competent keyless citizen he had proceeded energetically from
the unknown to the known through the incertitude of the void.


In what order of precedence, with what attendant ceremony was the exodus
from the house of bondage to the wilderness of inhabitation effected?

Lighted Candle in Stick borne by

BLOOM

Diaconal Hat on Ashplant borne by

STEPHEN:


With what intonation secreto of what commemorative psalm?

The 113th, _modus peregrinus: In exitu Israel de Egypto: domus Jacob de
populo barbaro_.


What did each do at the door of egress?

Bloom set the candlestick on the floor. Stephen put the hat on his head.


For what creature was the door of egress a door of ingress?

For a cat.


What spectacle confronted them when they, first the host, then the
guest, emerged silently, doubly dark, from obscurity by a passage from
the rere of the house into the penumbra of the garden?

The heaventree of stars hung with humid nightblue fruit.


With what meditations did Bloom accompany his demonstration to his
companion of various constellations?

Meditations of evolution increasingly vaster: of the moon invisible in
incipient lunation, approaching perigee: of the infinite lattiginous
scintillating uncondensed milky way, discernible by daylight by an
observer placed at the lower end of a cylindrical vertical shaft 5000
ft deep sunk from the surface towards the centre of the earth: of Sirius
(alpha in Canis Maior) 10 lightyears (57,000,000,000,000 miles) distant
and in volume 900 times the dimension of our planet: of Arcturus: of the
precession of equinoxes: of Orion with belt and sextuple sun theta and
nebula in which 100 of our solar systems could be contained: of moribund
and of nascent new stars such as Nova in 1901: of our system plunging
towards the constellation of Hercules: of the parallax or parallactic
drift of socalled fixed stars, in reality evermoving wanderers from
immeasurably remote eons to infinitely remote futures in comparison with
which the years, threescore and ten, of allotted human life formed a
parenthesis of infinitesimal brevity.


Were there obverse meditations of involution increasingly less vast?

Of the eons of geological periods recorded in the stratifications of the
earth: of the myriad minute entomological organic existences concealed
in cavities of the earth, beneath removable stones, in hives and mounds,
of microbes, germs, bacteria, bacilli, spermatozoa: of the incalculable
trillions of billions of millions of imperceptible molecules contained
by cohesion of molecular affinity in a single pinhead: of the universe
of human serum constellated with red and white bodies, themselves
universes of void space constellated with other bodies, each, in
continuity, its universe of divisible component bodies of which each was
again divisible in divisions of redivisible component bodies, dividends
and divisors ever diminishing without actual division till, if the
progress were carried far enough, nought nowhere was never reached.


Why did he not elaborate these calculations to a more precise result?

Because some years previously in 1886 when occupied with the problem
of the quadrature of the circle he had learned of the existence of a
number computed to a relative degree of accuracy to be of such magnitude
and of so many places, e.g., the 9th power of the 9th power of 9, that,
the result having been obtained, 33 closely printed volumes of 1000
pages each of innumerable quires and reams of India paper would have to
be requisitioned in order to contain the complete tale of its printed
integers of units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands, millions, tens of millions, hundreds of millions,
billions, the nucleus of the nebula of every digit of every series
containing succinctly the potentiality of being raised to the utmost
kinetic elaboration of any power of any of its powers.


Did he find the problems of the inhabitability of the planets and their
satellites by a race, given in species, and of the possible social and
moral redemption of said race by a redeemer, easier of solution?

Of a different order of difficulty. Conscious that the human organism,
normally capable of sustaining an atmospheric pressure of 19 tons,
when elevated to a considerable altitude in the terrestrial atmosphere
suffered with arithmetical progression of intensity, according as
the line of demarcation between troposphere and stratosphere was
approximated from nasal hemorrhage, impeded respiration and vertigo,
when proposing this problem for solution, he had conjectured as a
working hypothesis which could not be proved impossible that a more
adaptable and differently anatomically constructed race of beings might
subsist otherwise under Martian, Mercurial, Veneral, Jovian, Saturnian,
Neptunian or Uranian sufficient and equivalent conditions, though
an apogean humanity of beings created in varying forms with finite
differences resulting similar to the whole and to one another would
probably there as here remain inalterably and inalienably attached to
vanities, to vanities of vanities and to all that is vanity.

     And the problem of possible redemption?
     The minor was proved by the major.


Which various features of the constellations were in turn considered?

The various colours significant of various degrees of vitality (white,
yellow, crimson, vermilion, cinnabar): their degrees of brilliancy:
their magnitudes revealed up to and including the 7th: their positions:
the waggoner's star: Walsingham way: the chariot of David: the annular
cinctures of Saturn: the condensation of spiral nebulae into suns: the
interdependent gyrations of double suns: the independent synchronous
discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, Piazzi, Le Verrier, Herschel,
Galle: the systematisations attempted by Bode and Kepler of cubes
of distances and squares of times of revolution: the almost infinite
compressibility of hirsute comets and their vast elliptical egressive
and reentrant orbits from perihelion to aphelion: the sidereal origin of
meteoric stones: the Libyan floods on Mars about the period of the birth
of the younger astroscopist: the annual recurrence of meteoric showers
about the period of the feast of S. Lawrence (martyr, lo August): the
monthly recurrence known as the new moon with the old moon in her arms:
the posited influence of celestial on human bodies: the appearance of a
star (1st magnitude) of exceeding brilliancy dominating by night and
day (a new luminous sun generated by the collision and amalgamation in
incandescence of two nonluminous exsuns) about the period of the
birth of William Shakespeare over delta in the recumbent neversetting
constellation of Cassiopeia and of a star (2nd magnitude) of similar
origin but of lesser brilliancy which had appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of the Corona Septentrionalis about the period
of the birth of Leopold Bloom and of other stars of (presumably) similar
origin which had (effectively or presumably) appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of Andromeda about the period of the birth of
Stephen Dedalus, and in and from the constellation of Auriga some years
after the birth and death of Rudolph Bloom, junior, and in and from
other constellations some years before or after the birth or death of
other persons: the attendant phenomena of eclipses, solar and lunar,
from immersion to emersion, abatement of wind, transit of shadow,
taciturnity of winged creatures, emergence of nocturnal or crepuscular
animals, persistence of infernal light, obscurity of terrestrial waters,
pallor of human beings.


His (Bloom's) logical conclusion, having weighed the matter and allowing
for possible error?

That it was not a heaventree, not a heavengrot, not a heavenbeast, not
a heavenman. That it was a Utopia, there being no known method from
the known to the unknown: an infinity renderable equally finite by the
suppositious apposition of one or more bodies equally of the same and of
different magnitudes: a mobility of illusory forms immobilised in space,
remobilised in air: a past which possibly had ceased to exist as a
present before its probable spectators had entered actual present
existence.


Was he more convinced of the esthetic value of the spectacle?

Indubitably in consequence of the reiterated examples of poets in the
delirium of the frenzy of attachment or in the abasement of rejection
invoking ardent sympathetic constellations or the frigidity of the
satellite of their planet.


Did he then accept as an article of belief the theory of astrological
influences upon sublunary disasters?

It seemed to him as possible of proof as of confutation and the
nomenclature employed in its selenographical charts as attributable to
verifiable intuition as to fallacious analogy: the lake of dreams, the
sea of rains, the gulf of dews, the ocean of fecundity.


What special affinities appeared to him to exist between the moon and
woman?

Her antiquity in preceding and surviving successive tellurian
generations: her nocturnal predominance: her satellitic dependence:
her luminary reflection: her constancy under all her phases, rising
and setting by her appointed times, waxing and waning: the forced
invariability of her aspect: her indeterminate response to inaffirmative
interrogation: her potency over effluent and refluent waters: her power
to enamour, to mortify, to invest with beauty, to render insane, to
incite to and aid delinquency: the tranquil inscrutability of her
visage: the terribility of her isolated dominant implacable resplendent
propinquity: her omens of tempest and of calm: the stimulation of her
light, her motion and her presence: the admonition of her craters, her
arid seas, her silence: her splendour, when visible: her attraction,
when invisible.


What visible luminous sign attracted Bloom's, who attracted Stephen's,
gaze?

In the second storey (rere) of his (Bloom's) house the light of a
paraffin oil lamp with oblique shade projected on a screen of roller
blind supplied by Frank O'Hara, window blind, curtain pole and revolving
shutter manufacturer, 16 Aungier street.


How did he elucidate the mystery of an invisible attractive person, his
wife Marion (Molly) Bloom, denoted by a visible splendid sign, a lamp?

With indirect and direct verbal allusions or affirmations: with subdued
affection and admiration: with description: with impediment: with
suggestion.


Both then were silent?

Silent, each contemplating the other in both mirrors of the reciprocal
flesh of theirhisnothis fellowfaces.


Were they indefinitely inactive?

At Stephen's suggestion, at Bloom's instigation both, first Stephen,
then Bloom, in penumbra urinated, their sides contiguous, their organs
of micturition reciprocally rendered invisible by manual circumposition,
their gazes, first Bloom's, then Stephen's, elevated to the projected
luminous and semiluminous shadow.


Similarly?

The trajectories of their, first sequent, then simultaneous, urinations
were dissimilar: Bloom's longer, less irruent, in the incomplete form of
the bifurcated penultimate alphabetical letter, who in his ultimate
year at High School (1880) had been capable of attaining the point
of greatest altitude against the whole concurrent strength of the
institution, 210 scholars: Stephen's higher, more sibilant, who in the
ultimate hours of the previous day had augmented by diuretic consumption
an insistent vesical pressure.


What different problems presented themselves to each concerning the
invisible audible collateral organ of the other?

To Bloom: the problems of irritability, tumescence, rigidity,
reactivity, dimension, sanitariness, pilosity.

To Stephen: the problem of the sacerdotal integrity of Jesus circumcised
(I January, holiday of obligation to hear mass and abstain from
unnecessary servile work) and the problem as to whether the divine
prepuce, the carnal bridal ring of the holy Roman catholic apostolic
church, conserved in Calcata, were deserving of simple hyperduly or of
the fourth degree of latria accorded to the abscission of such divine
excrescences as hair and toenails.


What celestial sign was by both simultaneously observed?

A star precipitated with great apparent velocity across the firmament
from Vega in the Lyre above the zenith beyond the stargroup of the Tress
of Berenice towards the zodiacal sign of Leo.


How did the centripetal remainer afford egress to the centrifugal
departer?

By inserting the barrel of an arruginated male key in the hole of an
unstable female lock, obtaining a purchase on the bow of the key and
turning its wards from right to left, withdrawing a bolt from its
staple, pulling inward spasmodically an obsolescent unhinged door and
revealing an aperture for free egress and free ingress.


How did they take leave, one of the other, in separation?

Standing perpendicular at the same door and on different sides of its
base, the lines of their valedictory arms, meeting at any point and
forming any angle less than the sum of two right angles.


What sound accompanied the union of their tangent, the disunion of their
(respectively) centrifugal and centripetal hands?

The sound of the peal of the hour of the night by the chime of the bells
in the church of Saint George.


What echoes of that sound were by both and each heard?

By Stephen:

_Liliata rutilantium. Turma circumdet. Iubilantium te virginum. Chorus
excipiat._

By Bloom:

     _Heigho, heigho,
     Heigho, heigho._


Where were the several members of the company which with Bloom that day
at the bidding of that peal had travelled from Sandymount in the south
to Glasnevin in the north?

Martin Cunningham (in bed), Jack Power (in bed), Simon Dedalus (in bed),
Ned Lambert (in bed), Tom Kernan (in bed), Joe Hynes (in bed), John
Henry Menton (in bed), Bernard Corrigan (in bed), Patsy Dignam (in bed),
Paddy Dignam (in the grave).


Alone, what did Bloom hear?

The double reverberation of retreating feet on the heavenborn earth, the
double vibration of a jew's harp in the resonant lane.


Alone, what did Bloom feel?

The cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing
point or the absolute zero of Fahrenheit, Centigrade or Reaumur: the
incipient intimations of proximate dawn.


Of what did bellchime and handtouch and footstep and lonechill remind
him?

Of companions now in various manners in different places defunct: Percy
Apjohn (killed in action, Modder River), Philip Gilligan (phthisis,
Jervis Street hospital), Matthew F. Kane (accidental drowning, Dublin
Bay), Philip Moisel (pyemia, Heytesbury street), Michael Hart (phthisis,
Mater Misericordiae hospital), Patrick Dignam (apoplexy, Sandymount).


What prospect of what phenomena inclined him to remain?

The disparition of three final stars, the diffusion of daybreak, the
apparition of a new solar disk.


Had he ever been a spectator of those phenomena?

Once, in 1887, after a protracted performance of charades in the house
of Luke Doyle, Kimmage, he had awaited with patience the apparition
of the diurnal phenomenon, seated on a wall, his gaze turned in the
direction of Mizrach, the east.


He remembered the initial paraphenomena?

More active air, a matutinal distant cock, ecclesiastical clocks at
various points, avine music, the isolated tread of an early wayfarer,
the visible diffusion of the light of an invisible luminous body, the
first golden limb of the resurgent sun perceptible low on the horizon.


Did he remain?

With deep inspiration he returned, retraversing the garden, reentering
the passage, reclosing the door. With brief suspiration he reassumed the
candle, reascended the stairs, reapproached the door of the front room,
hallfloor, and reentered.


What suddenly arrested his ingress?

The right temporal lobe of the hollow sphere of his cranium came into
contact with a solid timber angle where, an infinitesimal but sensible
fraction of a second later, a painful sensation was located in
consequence of antecedent sensations transmitted and registered.


Describe the alterations effected in the disposition of the articles of
furniture.

A sofa upholstered in prune plush had been translocated from opposite
the door to the ingleside near the compactly furled Union Jack (an
alteration which he had frequently intended to execute): the blue and
white checker inlaid majolicatopped table had been placed opposite the
door in the place vacated by the prune plush sofa: the walnut sideboard
(a projecting angle of which had momentarily arrested his ingress) had
been moved from its position beside the door to a more advantageous but
more perilous position in front of the door: two chairs had been moved
from right and left of the ingleside to the position originally occupied
by the blue and white checker inlaid majolicatopped table.


Describe them.

One: a squat stuffed easychair, with stout arms extended and back
slanted to the rere, which, repelled in recoil, had then upturned an
irregular fringe of a rectangular rug and now displayed on its amply
upholstered seat a centralised diffusing and diminishing discolouration.
The other: a slender splayfoot chair of glossy cane curves, placed
directly opposite the former, its frame from top to seat and from seat
to base being varnished dark brown, its seat being a bright circle of
white plaited rush.


What significances attached to these two chairs?

Significances of similitude, of posture, of symbolism, of circumstantial
evidence, of testimonial supermanence.


What occupied the position originally occupied by the sideboard?

A vertical piano (Cadby) with exposed keyboard, its closed coffin
supporting a pair of long yellow ladies' gloves and an emerald ashtray
containing four consumed matches, a partly consumed cigarette and two
discoloured ends of cigarettes, its musicrest supporting the music in
the key of G natural for voice and piano of _Love's Old Sweet Song_
(words by G. Clifton Bingham, composed by J. L. Molloy, sung by Madam
Antoinette Sterling) open at the last page with the final indications
_ad libitum, forte_, pedal, _animato_, sustained pedal, _ritirando_,
close.


With what sensations did Bloom contemplate in rotation these objects?

With strain, elevating a candlestick: with pain, feeling on his right
temple a contused tumescence: with attention, focussing his gaze on
a large dull passive and a slender bright active: with solicitation,
bending and downturning the upturned rugfringe: with amusement,
remembering Dr Malachi Mulligan's scheme of colour containing the
gradation of green: with pleasure, repeating the words and antecedent
act and perceiving through various channels of internal sensibility
the consequent and concomitant tepid pleasant diffusion of gradual
discolouration.


His next proceeding?

From an open box on the majolicatopped table he extracted a black
diminutive cone, one inch in height, placed it on its circular base on
a small tin plate, placed his candlestick on the right corner of the
mantelpiece, produced from his waistcoat a folded page of prospectus
(illustrated) entitled Agendath Netaim, unfolded the same, examined
it superficially, rolled it into a thin cylinder, ignited it in the
candleflame, applied it when ignited to the apex of the cone till the
latter reached the stage of rutilance, placed the cylinder in the basin
of the candlestick disposing its unconsumed part in such a manner as to
facilitate total combustion.


What followed this operation?

The truncated conical crater summit of the diminutive volcano emitted a
vertical and serpentine fume redolent of aromatic oriental incense.


What homothetic objects, other than the candlestick, stood on the
mantelpiece?

A timepiece of striated Connemara marble, stopped at the hour of 4.46
a.m. on the 21 March 1896, matrimonial gift of Matthew Dillon: a dwarf
tree of glacial arborescence under a transparent bellshade, matrimonial
gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle: an embalmed owl, matrimonial gift of
Alderman John Hooper.


What interchanges of looks took place between these three objects and
Bloom?

In the mirror of the giltbordered pierglass the undecorated back of the
dwarf tree regarded the upright back of the embalmed owl. Before
the mirror the matrimonial gift of Alderman John Hooper with a clear
melancholy wise bright motionless compassionate gaze regarded Bloom
while Bloom with obscure tranquil profound motionless compassionated
gaze regarded the matrimonial gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle.


What composite asymmetrical image in the mirror then attracted his
attention?

The image of a solitary (ipsorelative) mutable (aliorelative) man.


Why solitary (ipsorelative)?

_Brothers and sisters had he none. Yet that man's father was his
grandfather's son._


Why mutable (aliorelative)?

From infancy to maturity he had resembled his maternal procreatrix.
From maturity to senility he would increasingly resemble his paternal
procreator.


What final visual impression was communicated to him by the mirror?

The optical reflection of several inverted volumes improperly arranged
and not in the order of their common letters with scintillating titles
on the two bookshelves opposite.


Catalogue these books.

_Thom's Dublin Post Office Directory, 1886_. Denis Florence M'Carthy's
_Poetical Works_ (copper beechleaf bookmark at p. 5). Shakespeare's
_Works_ (dark crimson morocco, goldtooled).

_The Useful Ready Reckoner_ (brown cloth).

_The Secret History of the Court of Charles II_ (red cloth, tooled
binding). _The Child's Guide_ (blue cloth).

_The Beauties of Killarney_ (wrappers).

_When We Were Boys_ by William O'Brien M. P. (green cloth, slightly
faded, envelope bookmark at p. 217).

_Thoughts from Spinoza_ (maroon leather).

_The Story of the Heavens_ by Sir Robert Ball (blue cloth). Ellis's
_Three Trips to Madagascar_ (brown cloth, title obliterated).

_The Stark-Munro Letters_ by A. Conan Doyle, property of the City of
Dublin Public Library, 106 Capel street, lent 21 May (Whitsun Eve) 1904,
due 4 June 1904, 13 days overdue (black cloth binding, bearing white
letternumber ticket).

_Voyages in China_ by "Viator" (recovered with brown paper, red ink
title).

_Philosophy of the Talmud_ (sewn pamphlet). Lockhart's _Life of
Napoleon_ (cover wanting, marginal annotations, minimising victories,
aggrandising defeats of the protagonist).

_Soll und Haben_ by Gustav Freytag (black boards, Gothic characters,
cigarette coupon bookmark at p. 24). Hozier's _History of the
Russo-Turkish War_ (brown cloth, a volumes, with gummed label, Garrison
Library, Governor's Parade, Gibraltar, on verso of cover).

_Laurence Bloomfield in Ireland_ by William Allingham (second edition,
green cloth, gilt trefoil design, previous owner's name on recto of
flyleaf erased).

_A Handbook of Astronomy_ (cover, brown leather, detached, S plates,
antique letterpress long primer, author's footnotes nonpareil, marginal
clues brevier, captions small pica).

_The Hidden Life of Christ_ (black boards).

_In the Track of the Sun_ (yellow cloth, titlepage missing, recurrent
title intestation).

_Physical Strength and How to Obtain It_ by Eugen Sandow (red cloth).

_Short but yet Plain Elements of Geometry_ written in French by F.
Ignat. Pardies and rendered into English by John Harris D. D. London,
printed for R. Knaplock at the Bifhop's Head, MDCCXI, with dedicatory
epiftle to his worthy friend Charles Cox, efquire, Member of Parliament
for the burgh of Southwark and having ink calligraphed statement on the
flyleaf certifying that the book was the property of Michael Gallagher,
dated this 10th day of May 1822 and requefting the perfon who should
find it, if the book should be loft or go aftray, to reftore it to
Michael Gallagher, carpenter, Dufery Gate, Ennifcorthy, county Wicklow,
the fineft place in the world.


What reflections occupied his mind during the process of reversion of
the inverted volumes?

The necessity of order, a place for everything and everything in its
place: the deficient appreciation of literature possessed by females:
the incongruity of an apple incuneated in a tumbler and of an umbrella
inclined in a closestool: the insecurity of hiding any secret document
behind, beneath or between the pages of a book.


Which volume was the largest in bulk?

Hozier's _History of the Russo-Turkish war._


What among other data did the second volume of the work in question
contain?

The name of a decisive battle (forgotten), frequently remembered by a
decisive officer, major Brian Cooper Tweedy (remembered).


Why, firstly and secondly, did he not consult the work in question?

Firstly, in order to exercise mnemotechnic: secondly, because after an
interval of amnesia, when, seated at the central table, about to consult
the work in question, he remembered by mnemotechnic the name of the
military engagement, Plevna.


What caused him consolation in his sitting posture?

The candour, nudity, pose, tranquility, youth, grace, sex, counsel of a
statue erect in the centre of the table, an image of Narcissus purchased
by auction from P. A. Wren, 9 Bachelor's Walk.


What caused him irritation in his sitting posture? Inhibitory pressure
of collar (size 17) and waistcoat (5 buttons), two articles of clothing
superfluous in the costume of mature males and inelastic to alterations
of mass by expansion.


How was the irritation allayed?

He removed his collar, with contained black necktie and collapsible
stud, from his neck to a position on the left of the table. He
unbuttoned successively in reversed direction waistcoat, trousers, shirt
and vest along the medial line of irregular incrispated black hairs
extending in triangular convergence from the pelvic basin over the
circumference of the abdomen and umbilicular fossicle along the medial
line of nodes to the intersection of the sixth pectoral vertebrae,
thence produced both ways at right angles and terminating in circles
described about two equidistant points, right and left, on the summits
of the mammary prominences. He unbraced successively each of six minus
one braced trouser buttons, arranged in pairs, of which one incomplete.


What involuntary actions followed?

He compressed between 2 fingers the flesh circumjacent to a cicatrice in
the left infracostal region below the diaphragm resulting from a sting
inflicted 2 weeks and 3 days previously (23 May 1904) by a bee.
He scratched imprecisely with his right hand, though insensible of
prurition, various points and surfaces of his partly exposed, wholly
abluted skin. He inserted his left hand into the left lower pocket of
his waistcoat and extracted and replaced a silver coin (I shilling),
placed there (presumably) on the occasion (17 October 1903) of the
interment of Mrs Emily Sinico, Sydney Parade.


Compile the budget for 16 June 1904. DEBIT

     1 Pork Kidney
     1 Copy FREEMAN'S JOURNAL
     1 Bath And Gratification
     Tramfare
     1 In Memoriam Patrick Dignam
     2 Banbury cakes
     1 Lunch
     1 Renewal fee for book
     1 Packet Notepaper and Envelopes
     1 Dinner and Gratification
     1 Postal Order and Stamp
     Tramfare
     1 Pig's Foot
     1 Sheep's Trotter
     1 Cake Fry's Plain Chocolate
     1 Square Soda Bread
     1 Coffee and Bun
     Loan (Stephen Dedalus) refunded
     BALANCE


     L. s. d.
     0--0--3
     0--0--1
     0--1--6
     0--0--1
     0--5--0
     0--0--1
     0--0--7
     0--1--0
     0--0--2
     0--2--0
     0--2--8
     0--0--1
     0--0--4
     0--0--3
     0--0--1
     0--0--4
     0--0--4
     1--7--0
     0-17--5
     2-19--3
     CREDIT

     Cash in hand
     Commission recd. _Freeman's Journal_
     Loan (Stephen Dedalus)





     L. s. d.
     0--4--9
     1--7--6
     1--7--0





     2-19--3




Did the process of divestiture continue?

Sensible of a benignant persistent ache in his footsoles he extended
his foot to one side and observed the creases, protuberances and salient
points caused by foot pressure in the course of walking repeatedly in
several different directions, then, inclined, he disnoded the laceknots,
unhooked and loosened the laces, took off each of his two boots for the
second time, detached the partially moistened right sock through the
fore part of which the nail of his great toe had again effracted, raised
his right foot and, having unhooked a purple elastic sock suspender,
took off his right sock, placed his unclothed right foot on the margin
of the seat of his chair, picked at and gently lacerated the protruding
part of the great toenail, raised the part lacerated to his nostrils and
inhaled the odour of the quick, then, with satisfaction, threw away the
lacerated ungual fragment.


Why with satisfaction?

Because the odour inhaled corresponded to other odours inhaled of other
ungual fragments, picked and lacerated by Master Bloom, pupil of Mrs
Ellis's juvenile school, patiently each night in the act of brief
genuflection and nocturnal prayer and ambitious meditation.


In what ultimate ambition had all concurrent and consecutive ambitions
now coalesced?

Not to inherit by right of primogeniture, gavelkind or borough English,
or possess in perpetuity an extensive demesne of a sufficient number of
acres, roods and perches, statute land measure (valuation 42 pounds), of
grazing turbary surrounding a baronial hall with gatelodge and carriage
drive nor, on the other hand, a terracehouse or semidetached villa,
described as _Rus in Urbe_ or _Qui si sana_, but to purchase by private
treaty in fee simple a thatched bungalowshaped 2 storey dwellinghouse of
southerly aspect, surmounted by vane and lightning conductor, connected
with the earth, with porch covered by parasitic plants (ivy or Virginia
creeper), halldoor, olive green, with smart carriage finish and neat
doorbrasses, stucco front with gilt tracery at eaves and gable, rising,
if possible, upon a gentle eminence with agreeable prospect from balcony
with stone pillar parapet over unoccupied and unoccupyable interjacent
pastures and standing in 5 or 6 acres of its own ground, at such
a distance from the nearest public thoroughfare as to render its
houselights visible at night above and through a quickset hornbeam hedge
of topiary cutting, situate at a given point not less than 1 statute
mile from the periphery of the metropolis, within a time limit of not
more than 15 minutes from tram or train line (e.g., Dundrum, south, or
Sutton, north, both localities equally reported by trial to resemble the
terrestrial poles in being favourable climates for phthisical subjects),
the premises to be held under feefarm grant, lease 999 years, the
messuage to consist of 1 drawingroom with baywindow (2 lancets),
thermometer affixed, 1 sittingroom, 4 bedrooms, 2 servants' rooms, tiled
kitchen with close range and scullery, lounge hall fitted with linen
wallpresses, fumed oak sectional bookcase containing the Encyclopaedia
Britannica and New Century Dictionary, transverse obsolete medieval and
oriental weapons, dinner gong, alabaster lamp, bowl pendant, vulcanite
automatic telephone receiver with adjacent directory, handtufted
Axminster carpet with cream ground and trellis border, loo table with
pillar and claw legs, hearth with massive firebrasses and ormolu mantel
chronometer clock, guaranteed timekeeper with cathedral chime, barometer
with hygrographic chart, comfortable lounge settees and corner fitments,
upholstered in ruby plush with good springing and sunk centre, three
banner Japanese screen and cuspidors (club style, rich winecoloured
leather, gloss renewable with a minimum of labour by use of linseed
oil and vinegar) and pyramidically prismatic central chandelier lustre,
bentwood perch with fingertame parrot (expurgated language), embossed
mural paper at 10/- per dozen with transverse swags of carmine floral
design and top crown frieze, staircase, three continuous flights at
successive right angles, of varnished cleargrained oak, treads and
risers, newel, balusters and handrail, with steppedup panel dado,
dressed with camphorated wax: bathroom, hot and cold supply, reclining
and shower: water closet on mezzanine provided with opaque singlepane
oblong window, tipup seat, bracket lamp, brass tierod and brace,
armrests, footstool and artistic oleograph on inner face of door:
ditto, plain: servants' apartments with separate sanitary and hygienic
necessaries for cook, general and betweenmaid (salary, rising by
biennial unearned increments of 2 pounds, with comprehensive fidelity
insurance, annual bonus (1 pound) and retiring allowance (based on
the 65 system) after 30 years' service), pantry, buttery, larder,
refrigerator, outoffices, coal and wood cellarage with winebin (still
and sparkling vintages) for distinguished guests, if entertained to
dinner (evening dress), carbon monoxide gas supply throughout.


What additional attractions might the grounds contain?

As addenda, a tennis and fives court, a shrubbery, a glass summerhouse
with tropical palms, equipped in the best botanical manner, a rockery
with waterspray, a beehive arranged on humane principles, oval
flowerbeds in rectangular grassplots set with eccentric ellipses of
scarlet and chrome tulips, blue scillas, crocuses, polyanthus, sweet
William, sweet pea, lily of the valley (bulbs obtainable from sir James
W. Mackey (Limited) wholesale and retail seed and bulb merchants and
nurserymen, agents for chemical manures, 23 Sackville street, upper), an
orchard, kitchen garden and vinery protected against illegal trespassers
by glasstopped mural enclosures, a lumbershed with padlock for various
inventoried implements.


As?

Eeltraps, lobsterpots, fishingrods, hatchet, steelyard, grindstone,
clodcrusher, swatheturner, carriagesack, telescope ladder, 10 tooth
rake, washing clogs, haytedder, tumbling rake, billhook, paintpot,
brush, hoe and so on.

What improvements might be subsequently introduced?

A rabbitry and fowlrun, a dovecote, a botanical conservatory, 2 hammocks
(lady's and gentleman's), a sundial shaded and sheltered by laburnum
or lilac trees, an exotically harmonically accorded Japanese tinkle
gatebell affixed to left lateral gatepost, a capacious waterbutt,
a lawnmower with side delivery and grassbox, a lawnsprinkler with
hydraulic hose.


What facilities of transit were desirable?

When citybound frequent connection by train or tram from their
respective intermediate station or terminal. When countrybound
velocipedes, a chainless freewheel roadster cycle with side basketcar
attached, or draught conveyance, a donkey with wicker trap or smart
phaeton with good working solidungular cob (roan gelding, 14 h).


What might be the name of this erigible or erected residence?

Bloom Cottage. Saint Leopold's. Flowerville.


Could Bloom of 7 Eccles street foresee Bloom of Flowerville?

In loose allwool garments with Harris tweed cap, price 8/6, and useful
garden boots with elastic gussets and wateringcan, planting aligned
young firtrees, syringing, pruning, staking, sowing hayseed, trundling a
weedladen wheelbarrow without excessive fatigue at sunset amid the scent
of newmown hay, ameliorating the soil, multiplying wisdom, achieving
longevity.


What syllabus of intellectual pursuits was simultaneously possible?

Snapshot photography, comparative study of religions, folklore relative
to various amatory and superstitious practices, contemplation of the
celestial constellations.


What lighter recreations?

Outdoor: garden and fieldwork, cycling on level macadamised causeways
ascents of moderately high hills, natation in secluded fresh water and
unmolested river boating in secure wherry or light curricle with kedge
anchor on reaches free from weirs and rapids (period of estivation),
vespertinal perambulation or equestrian circumprocession with inspection
of sterile landscape and contrastingly agreeable cottagers' fires of
smoking peat turves (period of hibernation). Indoor: discussion in
tepid security of unsolved historical and criminal problems: lecture of
unexpurgated exotic erotic masterpieces: house carpentry with toolbox
containing hammer, awl nails, screws, tintacks, gimlet, tweezers,
bullnose plane and turnscrew. Might he become a gentleman farmer of
field produce and live stock?

Not impossibly, with 1 or 2 stripper cows, 1 pike of upland hay and
requisite farming implements, e.g., an end-to-end churn, a turnip pulper
etc.


What would be his civic functions and social status among the county
families and landed gentry?

Arranged successively in ascending powers of hierarchical order, that
of gardener, groundsman, cultivator, breeder, and at the zenith of his
career, resident magistrate or justice of the peace with a family crest
and coat of arms and appropriate classical motto _(Semper paratus_),
duly recorded in the court directory (Bloom, Leopold P., M. P., P. C.,
K. P., L. L. D. (_honoris causa_), Bloomville, Dundrum) and mentioned in
court and fashionable intelligence (Mr and Mrs Leopold Bloom have left
Kingstown for England).


What course of action did he outline for himself in such capacity?

A course that lay between undue clemency and excessive rigour:
the dispensation in a heterogeneous society of arbitrary classes,
incessantly rearranged in terms of greater and lesser social inequality,
of unbiassed homogeneous indisputable justice, tempered with mitigants
of the widest possible latitude but exactable to the uttermost farthing
with confiscation of estate, real and personal, to the crown. Loyal to
the highest constituted power in the land, actuated by an innate love of
rectitude his aims would be the strict maintenance of public order,
the repression of many abuses though not of all simultaneously (every
measure of reform or retrenchment being a preliminary solution to be
contained by fluxion in the final solution), the upholding of the letter
of the law (common, statute and law merchant) against all traversers in
covin and trespassers acting in contravention of bylaws and regulations,
all resuscitators (by trespass and petty larceny of kindlings) of
venville rights, obsolete by desuetude, all orotund instigators
of international persecution, all perpetuators of international
animosities, all menial molestors of domestic conviviality, all
recalcitrant violators of domestic connubiality.


Prove that he had loved rectitude from his earliest youth.

To Master Percy Apjohn at High School in 1880 he had divulged his
disbelief in the tenets of the Irish (protestant) church (to which his
father Rudolf Virag (later Rudolph Bloom) had been converted from the
Israelitic faith and communion in 1865 by the Society for promoting
Christianity among the jews) subsequently abjured by him in favour of
Roman catholicism at the epoch of and with a view to his matrimony
in 1888. To Daniel Magrane and Francis Wade in 1882 during a juvenile
friendship (terminated by the premature emigration of the former) he
had advocated during nocturnal perambulations the political theory of
colonial (e.g. Canadian) expansion and the evolutionary theories of
Charles Darwin, expounded in _The Descent of Man_ and _The Origin
of Species_. In 1885 he had publicly expressed his adherence to the
collective and national economic programme advocated by James Fintan
Lalor, John Fisher Murray, John Mitchel, J. F. X. O'Brien and others,
the agrarian policy of Michael Davitt, the constitutional agitation of
Charles Stewart Parnell (M. P. for Cork City), the programme of
peace, retrenchment and reform of William Ewart Gladstone (M. P. for
Midlothian, N. B.) and, in support of his political convictions, had
climbed up into a secure position amid the ramifications of a tree
on Northumberland road to see the entrance (2 February 1888) into the
capital of a demonstrative torchlight procession of 20,000 torchbearers,
divided into 120 trade corporations, bearing 2000 torches in escort of
the marquess of Ripon and (honest) John Morley.


How much and how did he propose to pay for this country residence?

As per prospectus of the Industrious Foreign Acclimatised Nationalised
Friendly Stateaided Building Society (incorporated 1874), a maximum
of 60 pounds per annum, being 1/6 of an assured income, derived from
giltedged securities, representing at 5 % simple interest on capital of
1200 pounds (estimate of price at 20 years' purchase), of which to be
paid on acquisition and the balance in the form of annual rent, viz. 800
pounds plus 2 1/2 % interest on the same, repayable quarterly in equal
annual instalments until extinction by amortisation of loan advanced for
purchase within a period of 20 years, amounting to an annual rental of
64 pounds, headrent included, the titledeeds to remain in possession
of the lender or lenders with a saving clause envisaging forced sale,
foreclosure and mutual compensation in the event of protracted failure
to pay the terms assigned, otherwise the messuage to become the absolute
property of the tenant occupier upon expiry of the period of years
stipulated.


What rapid but insecure means to opulence might facilitate immediate
purchase?

A private wireless telegraph which would transmit by dot and dash system
the result of a national equine handicap (flat or steeplechase) of I or
more miles and furlongs won by an outsider at odds of 50 to 1 at 3 hr
8 m p.m. at Ascot (Greenwich time), the message being received and
available for betting purposes in Dublin at 2.59 p.m. (Dunsink time).
The unexpected discovery of an object of great monetary value (precious
stone, valuable adhesive or impressed postage stamps (7 schilling,
mauve, imperforate, Hamburg, 1866: 4 pence, rose, blue paper, perforate,
Great Britain, 1855: 1 franc, stone, official, rouletted, diagonal
surcharge, Luxemburg, 1878), antique dynastical ring, unique relic) in
unusual repositories or by unusual means: from the air (dropped by an
eagle in flight), by fire (amid the carbonised remains of an incendiated
edifice), in the sea (amid flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict), on
earth (in the gizzard of a comestible fowl). A Spanish prisoner's
donation of a distant treasure of valuables or specie or bullion lodged
with a solvent banking corporation loo years previously at 5% compound
interest of the collective worth of 5,000,000 pounds stg (five million
pounds sterling). A contract with an inconsiderate contractee for the
delivery of 32 consignments of some given commodity in consideration of
cash payment on delivery per delivery at the initial rate of 1/4d to be
increased constantly in the geometrical progression of 2 (1/4d, 1/2d,
1d, 2d, 4d, 8d, 1s 4d, 2s 8d to 32 terms). A prepared scheme
based on a study of the laws of probability to break the bank at Monte
Carlo. A solution of the secular problem of the quadrature of the
circle, government premium 1,000,000 pounds sterling.


Was vast wealth acquirable through industrial channels?

The reclamation of dunams of waste arenary soil, proposed in the
prospectus of Agendath Netaim, Bleibtreustrasse, Berlin, W. 15, by the
cultivation of orange plantations and melonfields and reafforestation.
The utilisation of waste paper, fells of sewer rodents, human excrement
possessing chemical properties, in view of the vast production of the
first, vast number of the second and immense quantity of the third,
every normal human being of average vitality and appetite producing
annually, cancelling byproducts of water, a sum total of 80 lbs. (mixed
animal and vegetable diet), to be multiplied by 4,386,035, the total
population of Ireland according to census returns of 1901.


Were there schemes of wider scope?

A scheme to be formulated and submitted for approval to the harbour
commissioners for the exploitation of white coal (hydraulic power),
obtained by hydroelectric plant at peak of tide at Dublin bar or at
head of water at Poulaphouca or Powerscourt or catchment basins of main
streams for the economic production of 500,000 W. H. P. of electricity.
A scheme to enclose the peninsular delta of the North Bull at Dollymount
and erect on the space of the foreland, used for golf links and rifle
ranges, an asphalted esplanade with casinos, booths, shooting galleries,
hotels, boardinghouses, readingrooms, establishments for mixed bathing.
A scheme for the use of dogvans and goatvans for the delivery of early
morning milk. A scheme for the development of Irish tourist traffic in
and around Dublin by means of petrolpropelled riverboats, plying in the
fluvial fairway between Island bridge and Ringsend, charabancs, narrow
gauge local railways, and pleasure steamers for coastwise navigation
(10/- per person per day, guide (trilingual) included). A scheme for
the repristination of passenger and goods traffics over Irish waterways,
when freed from weedbeds. A scheme to connect by tramline the Cattle
Market (North Circular road and Prussia street) with the quays (Sheriff
street, lower, and East Wall), parallel with the Link line railway
laid (in conjunction with the Great Southern and Western railway line)
between the cattle park, Liffey junction, and terminus of Midland Great
Western Railway 43 to 45 North

Wall, in proximity to the terminal stations or Dublin branches of Great
Central Railway, Midland Railway of England, City of Dublin Steam Packet
Company, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company, Dublin and Glasgow
Steam Packet Company, Glasgow, Dublin and Londonderry Steam Packet
Company (Laird line), British and Irish Steam Packet Company, Dublin
and Morecambe Steamers, London and North Western Railway Company, Dublin
Port and Docks Board Landing Sheds and transit sheds of Palgrave, Murphy
and Company, steamship owners, agents for steamers from Mediterranean,
Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium and Holland and for Liverpool
Underwriters' Association, the cost of acquired rolling stock for
animal transport and of additional mileage operated by the Dublin United
Tramways Company, limited, to be covered by graziers' fees.


Positing what protasis would the contraction for such several schemes
become a natural and necessary apodosis?

Given a guarantee equal to the sum sought, the support, by deed of
gift and transfer vouchers during donor's lifetime or by bequest
after donor's painless extinction, of eminent financiers (Blum Pasha,
Rothschild Guggenheim, Hirsch, Montefiore, Morgan, Rockefeller)
possessing fortunes in 6 figures, amassed during a successful life, and
joining capital with opportunity the thing required was done.


What eventuality would render him independent of such wealth?

The independent discovery of a goldseam of inexhaustible ore.


For what reason did he meditate on schemes so difficult of realisation?

It was one of his axioms that similar meditations or the automatic
relation to himself of a narrative concerning himself or tranquil
recollection of the past when practised habitually before retiring for
the night alleviated fatigue and produced as a result sound repose and
renovated vitality.


His justifications?

As a physicist he had learned that of the 70 years of complete human
life at least 2/7, viz. 20 years are passed in sleep. As a philosopher
he knew that at the termination of any allotted life only an
infinitesimal part of any person's desires has been realised. As a
physiologist he believed in the artificial placation of malignant
agencies chiefly operative during somnolence.


What did he fear?

The committal of homicide or suicide during sleep by an aberration
of the light of reason, the incommensurable categorical intelligence
situated in the cerebral convolutions.


What were habitually his final meditations?

Of some one sole unique advertisement to cause passers to stop in
wonder, a poster novelty, with all extraneous accretions excluded,
reduced to its simplest and most efficient terms not exceeding the span
of casual vision and congruous with the velocity of modern life.


What did the first drawer unlocked contain?

A Vere Foster's handwriting copybook, property of Milly (Millicent)
Bloom, certain pages of which bore diagram drawings, marked _Papli_,
which showed a large globular head with 5 hairs erect, 2 eyes in
profile, the trunk full front with 3 large buttons, 1 triangular foot: 2
fading photographs of queen Alexandra of England and of Maud Branscombe,
actress and professional beauty: a Yuletide card, bearing on it a
pictorial representation of a parasitic plant, the legend _Mizpah_, the
date Xmas 1892, the name of the senders: from Mr + Mrs M. Comerford, the
versicle: _May this Yuletide bring to thee, Joy and peace and welcome
glee_: a butt of red partly liquefied sealing wax, obtained from the
stores department of Messrs Hely's, Ltd., 89, 90, and 91 Dame street:
a box containing the remainder of a gross of gilt "J" pennibs, obtained
from same department of same firm: an old sandglass which rolled
containing sand which rolled: a sealed prophecy (never unsealed) written
by Leopold Bloom in 1886 concerning the consequences of the passing into
law of William Ewart Gladstone's Home Rule bill of 1886 (never passed
into law): a bazaar ticket, no 2004, of S. Kevin's Charity Fair, price
6d, 100 prizes: an infantile epistle, dated, small em monday, reading:
capital pee Papli comma capital aitch How are you note of interrogation
capital eye I am very well full stop new paragraph signature with
flourishes capital em Milly no stop: a cameo brooch, property of Ellen
Bloom (born Higgins), deceased: a cameo scarfpin, property of Rudolph
Bloom (born Virag), deceased: 3 typewritten letters, addressee, Henry
Flower, c/o. P. O. Westland Row, addresser, Martha Clifford, c/o. P. O.
Dolphin's Barn: the transliterated name and address of the addresser
of the 3 letters in reversed alphabetic boustrophedonic punctated
quadrilinear cryptogram (vowels suppressed) N. IGS./WI. UU. OX/W. OKS.
MH/Y. IM: a press cutting from an English weekly periodical _Modern
Society_, subject corporal chastisement in girls' schools: a pink ribbon
which had festooned an Easter egg in the year 1899: two partly uncoiled
rubber preservatives with reserve pockets, purchased by post from Box
32, P. O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: 1 pack of 1 dozen creamlaid
envelopes and feintruled notepaper, watermarked, now reduced by 3: some
assorted Austrian-Hungarian coins: 2 coupons of the Royal and Privileged
Hungarian Lottery: a lowpower magnifying glass: 2 erotic photocards
showing a) buccal coition between nude senorita (rere presentation,
superior position) and nude torero (fore presentation, inferior
position) b) anal violation by male religious (fully clothed, eyes
abject) of female religious (partly clothed, eyes direct), purchased by
post from Box 32, P. O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: a press cutting
of recipe for renovation of old tan boots: a Id adhesive stamp,
lavender, of the reign of Queen Victoria: a chart of the measurements
of Leopold Bloom compiled before, during and after 2 months' consecutive
use of Sandow-Whiteley's pulley exerciser (men's 15/-, athlete's 20/-)
viz. chest 28 in and 29 1/2 in, biceps 9 in and 10 in, forearm 8 1/2 in
and 9 in, thigh 10 in and 12 in, calf 11 in and 12 in: 1 prospectus of
The Wonderworker, the world's greatest remedy for rectal complaints,
direct from Wonderworker, Coventry House, South Place, London E C,
addressed (erroneously) to Mrs L. Bloom with brief accompanying note
commencing (erroneously): Dear Madam.


Quote the textual terms in which the prospectus claimed advantages for
this thaumaturgic remedy.

It heals and soothes while you sleep, in case of trouble in breaking
wind, assists nature in the most formidable way, insuring instant relief
in discharge of gases, keeping parts clean and free natural action, an
initial outlay of 7/6 making a new man of you and life worth living.
Ladies find Wonderworker especially useful, a pleasant surprise when
they note delightful result like a cool drink of fresh spring water on
a sultry summer's day. Recommend it to your lady and gentlemen friends,
lasts a lifetime. Insert long round end. Wonderworker.


Were there testimonials?

Numerous. From clergyman, British naval officer, wellknown author, city
man, hospital nurse, lady, mother of five, absentminded beggar.


How did absentminded beggar's concluding testimonial conclude?

What a pity the government did not supply our men with wonderworkers
during the South African campaign! What a relief it would have been!


What object did Bloom add to this collection of objects?

A 4th typewritten letter received by Henry Flower (let H. F. be L. B.)
from Martha Clifford (find M. C.).


What pleasant reflection accompanied this action?

The reflection that, apart from the letter in question, his magnetic
face, form and address had been favourably received during the course of
the preceding day by a wife (Mrs Josephine Breen, born Josie Powell),
a nurse, Miss Callan (Christian name unknown), a maid, Gertrude (Gerty,
family name unknown).


What possibility suggested itself?

The possibility of exercising virile power of fascination in the not
immediate future after an expensive repast in a private apartment in
the company of an elegant courtesan, of corporal beauty, moderately
mercenary, variously instructed, a lady by origin.


What did the 2nd drawer contain?

Documents: the birth certificate of Leopold Paula Bloom: an endowment
assurance policy of 500 pounds in the Scottish Widows' Assurance
Society, intestated Millicent (Milly) Bloom, coming into force at 25
years as with profit policy of 430 pounds, 462/10/0 and 500 pounds at
60 years or death, 65 years or death and death, respectively, or
with profit policy (paidup) of 299/10/0 together with cash payment of
133/10/0, at option: a bank passbook issued by the Ulster Bank, College
Green branch showing statement of a/c for halfyear ending 31 December
1903, balance in depositor's favour: 18/14/6 (eighteen pounds, fourteen
shillings and sixpence, sterling), net personalty: certificate of
possession of 900 pounds, Canadian 4 percent (inscribed) government
stock (free of stamp duty): dockets of the Catholic Cemeteries'
(Glasnevin) Committee, relative to a graveplot purchased: a local press
cutting concerning change of name by deedpoll.


Quote the textual terms of this notice.

I, Rudolph Virag, now resident at no 52 Clanbrassil street, Dublin,
formerly of Szombathely in the kingdom of Hungary, hereby give notice
that I have assumed and intend henceforth upon all occasions and at all
times to be known by the name of Rudolph Bloom.


What other objects relative to Rudolph Bloom (born Virag) were in the
2nd drawer?

An indistinct daguerreotype of Rudolf Virag and his father Leopold
Virag executed in the year 1852 in the portrait atelier of their
(respectively) 1st and 2nd cousin, Stefan Virag of Szesfehervar,
Hungary. An ancient haggadah book in which a pair of hornrimmed convex
spectacles inserted marked the passage of thanksgiving in the ritual
prayers for Pessach (Passover): a photocard of the Queen's Hotel,
Ennis, proprietor, Rudolph Bloom: an envelope addressed: _To My Dear Son
Leopold_.


What fractions of phrases did the lecture of those five whole words
evoke?

Tomorrow will be a week that I received... it is no use Leopold to be
... with your dear mother... that is not more to stand... to her...
all for me is out... be kind to Athos, Leopold... my dear son...
always... of me... _das Herz... Gott... dein_...


What reminiscences of a human subject suffering from progressive
melancholia did these objects evoke in Bloom?

An old man, widower, unkempt of hair, in bed, with head covered,
sighing: an infirm dog, Athos: aconite, resorted to by increasing doses
of grains and scruples as a palliative of recrudescent neuralgia: the
face in death of a septuagenarian, suicide by poison.


Why did Bloom experience a sentiment of remorse?

Because in immature impatience he had treated with disrespect certain
beliefs and practices.


As?

The prohibition of the use of fleshmeat and milk at one meal: the
hebdomadary symposium of incoordinately abstract, perfervidly concrete
mercantile coexreligionist excompatriots: the circumcision of
male infants: the supernatural character of Judaic scripture: the
ineffability of the tetragrammaton: the sanctity of the sabbath.


How did these beliefs and practices now appear to him?

Not more rational than they had then appeared, not less rational than
other beliefs and practices now appeared.


What first reminiscence had he of Rudolph Bloom (deceased)?

Rudolph Bloom (deceased) narrated to his son Leopold Bloom (aged 6) a
retrospective arrangement of migrations and settlements in and between
Dublin, London, Florence, Milan, Vienna, Budapest, Szombathely with
statements of satisfaction (his grandfather having seen Maria Theresia,
empress of Austria, queen of Hungary), with commercial advice (having
taken care of pence, the pounds having taken care of themselves).
Leopold Bloom (aged 6) had accompanied these narrations by constant
consultation of a geographical map of Europe (political) and by
suggestions for the establishment of affiliated business premises in the
various centres mentioned.


Had time equally but differently obliterated the memory of these
migrations in narrator and listener?

In narrator by the access of years and in consequence of the use of
narcotic toxin: in listener by the access of years and in consequence of
the action of distraction upon vicarious experiences.


What idiosyncracies of the narrator were concomitant products of
amnesia?

Occasionally he ate without having previously removed his hat.
Occasionally he drank voraciously the juice of gooseberry fool from an
inclined plate. Occasionally he removed from his lips the traces of food
by means of a lacerated envelope or other accessible fragment of paper.


What two phenomena of senescence were more frequent?

The myopic digital calculation of coins, eructation consequent upon
repletion.


What object offered partial consolation for these reminiscences?

The endowment policy, the bank passbook, the certificate of the
possession of scrip.


Reduce Bloom by cross multiplication of reverses of fortune, from which
these supports protected him, and by elimination of all positive values
to a negligible negative irrational unreal quantity.

Successively, in descending helotic order: Poverty: that of the outdoor
hawker of imitation jewellery, the dun for the recovery of bad and
doubtful debts, the poor rate and deputy cess collector. Mendicancy:
that of the fraudulent bankrupt with negligible assets paying 1s. 4d.
in the pound, sandwichman, distributor of throwaways, nocturnal vagrant,
insinuating sycophant, maimed sailor, blind stripling, superannuated
bailiffs man, marfeast, lickplate, spoilsport, pickthank, eccentric
public laughingstock seated on bench of public park under discarded
perforated umbrella. Destitution: the inmate of Old Man's House (Royal
Hospital) Kilmainham, the inmate of Simpson's Hospital for reduced but
respectable men permanently disabled by gout or want of sight. Nadir of
misery: the aged impotent disfranchised ratesupported moribund lunatic
pauper.


With which attendant indignities?

The unsympathetic indifference of previously amiable females, the
contempt of muscular males, the acceptance of fragments of bread,
the simulated ignorance of casual acquaintances, the latration of
illegitimate unlicensed vagabond dogs, the infantile discharge of
decomposed vegetable missiles, worth little or nothing, nothing or less
than nothing.


By what could such a situation be precluded?

By decease (change of state): by departure (change of place).


Which preferably?

The latter, by the line of least resistance.


What considerations rendered departure not entirely undesirable?

Constant cohabitation impeding mutual toleration of personal defects.
The habit of independent purchase increasingly cultivated. The necessity
to counteract by impermanent sojourn the permanence of arrest.


What considerations rendered departure not irrational?

The parties concerned, uniting, had increased and multiplied, which
being done, offspring produced and educed to maturity, the parties, if
not disunited were obliged to reunite for increase and multiplication,
which was absurd, to form by reunion the original couple of uniting
parties, which was impossible.


What considerations rendered departure desirable?

The attractive character of certain localities in Ireland and abroad,
as represented in general geographical maps of polychrome design or
in special ordnance survey charts by employment of scale numerals and
hachures.


In Ireland?

The cliffs of Moher, the windy wilds of Connemara, lough Neagh with
submerged petrified city, the Giant's Causeway, Fort Camden and Fort
Carlisle, the Golden Vale of Tipperary, the islands of Aran, the
pastures of royal Meath, Brigid's elm in Kildare, the Queen's Island
shipyard in Belfast, the Salmon Leap, the lakes of Killarney.


Abroad?

Ceylon (with spicegardens supplying tea to Thomas Kernan, agent for
Pulbrook, Robertson and Co, 2 Mincing Lane, London, E. C., 5 Dame
street, Dublin), Jerusalem, the holy city (with mosque of Omar and gate
of Damascus, goal of aspiration), the straits of Gibraltar (the unique
birthplace of Marion Tweedy), the Parthenon (containing statues of nude
Grecian divinities), the Wall street money market (which controlled
international finance), the Plaza de Toros at La Linea, Spain (where
O'Hara of the Camerons had slain the bull), Niagara (over which no human
being had passed with impunity), the land of the Eskimos (eaters
of soap), the forbidden country of Thibet (from which no traveller
returns), the bay of Naples (to see which was to die), the Dead Sea.


Under what guidance, following what signs?

At sea, septentrional, by night the polestar, located at the point of
intersection of the right line from beta to alpha in Ursa Maior produced
and divided externally at omega and the hypotenuse of the rightangled
triangle formed by the line alpha omega so produced and the line alpha
delta of Ursa Maior. On land, meridional, a bispherical moon, revealed
in imperfect varying phases of lunation through the posterior interstice
of the imperfectly occluded skirt of a carnose negligent perambulating
female, a pillar of the cloud by day.


What public advertisement would divulge the occultation of the departed?

5 pounds reward, lost, stolen or strayed from his residence 7 Eccles
street, missing gent about 40, answering to the name of Bloom, Leopold
(Poldy), height 5 ft 9 1/2 inches, full build, olive complexion, may
have since grown a beard, when last seen was wearing a black suit. Above
sum will be paid for information leading to his discovery.


What universal binomial denominations would be his as entity and
nonentity?

Assumed by any or known to none. Everyman or Noman.


What tributes his?

Honour and gifts of strangers, the friends of Everyman. A nymph
immortal, beauty, the bride of Noman.


Would the departed never nowhere nohow reappear?

Ever he would wander, selfcompelled, to the extreme limit of his
cometary orbit, beyond the fixed stars and variable suns and telescopic
planets, astronomical waifs and strays, to the extreme boundary of
space, passing from land to land, among peoples, amid events. Somewhere
imperceptibly he would hear and somehow reluctantly, suncompelled, obey
the summons of recall. Whence, disappearing from the constellation of
the Northern Crown he would somehow reappear reborn above delta in the
constellation of Cassiopeia and after incalculable eons of peregrination
return an estranged avenger, a wreaker of justice on malefactors, a dark
crusader, a sleeper awakened, with financial resources (by supposition)
surpassing those of Rothschild or the silver king.


What would render such return irrational?

An unsatisfactory equation between an exodus and return in time through
reversible space and an exodus and return in space through irreversible
time.


What play of forces, inducing inertia, rendered departure undesirable?

The lateness of the hour, rendering procrastinatory: the obscurity
of the night, rendering invisible: the uncertainty of thoroughfares,
rendering perilous: the necessity for repose, obviating movement: the
proximity of an occupied bed, obviating research: the anticipation of
warmth (human) tempered with coolness (linen), obviating desire and
rendering desirable: the statue of Narcissus, sound without echo,
desired desire.


What advantages were possessed by an occupied, as distinct from an
unoccupied bed?

The removal of nocturnal solitude, the superior quality of human
(mature female) to inhuman (hotwaterjar) calefaction, the stimulation of
matutinal contact, the economy of mangling done on the premises in the
case of trousers accurately folded and placed lengthwise between the
spring mattress (striped) and the woollen mattress (biscuit section).


What past consecutive causes, before rising preapprehended, of
accumulated fatigue did Bloom, before rising, silently recapitulate?

The preparation of breakfast (burnt offering): intestinal congestion and
premeditative defecation (holy of holies): the bath (rite of John): the
funeral (rite of Samuel): the advertisement of Alexander Keyes (Urim and
Thummim): the unsubstantial lunch (rite of Melchisedek): the visit to
museum and national library (holy place): the bookhunt along Bedford
row, Merchants' Arch, Wellington Quay (Simchath Torah): the music in the
Ormond Hotel (Shira Shirim): the altercation with a truculent troglodyte
in Bernard Kiernan's premises (holocaust): a blank period of time
including a cardrive, a visit to a house of mourning, a leavetaking
(wilderness): the eroticism produced by feminine exhibitionism (rite of
Onan): the prolonged delivery of Mrs Mina Purefoy (heave offering):
the visit to the disorderly house of Mrs Bella Cohen, 82 Tyrone
street, lower and subsequent brawl and chance medley in Beaver street
(Armageddon)--nocturnal perambulation to and from the cabman's shelter,
Butt Bridge (atonement).


What selfimposed enigma did Bloom about to rise in order to go so as to
conclude lest he should not conclude involuntarily apprehend?

The cause of a brief sharp unforeseen heard loud lone crack emitted by
the insentient material of a strainveined timber table.


What selfinvolved enigma did Bloom risen, going, gathering multicoloured
multiform multitudinous garments, voluntarily apprehending, not
comprehend?

Who was M'Intosh?


What selfevident enigma pondered with desultory constancy during 30
years did Bloom now, having effected natural obscurity by the extinction
of artificial light, silently suddenly comprehend?

Where was Moses when the candle went out?


What imperfections in a perfect day did Bloom, walking, charged with
collected articles of recently disvested male wearing apparel, silently,
successively, enumerate?

A provisional failure to obtain renewal of an advertisement: to obtain
a certain quantity of tea from Thomas Kernan (agent for Pulbrook,
Robertson and Co, 5 Dame Street, Dublin, and 2 Mincing Lane, London E.
C.): to certify the presence or absence of posterior rectal orifice in
the case of Hellenic female divinities: to obtain admission (gratuitous
or paid) to the performance of Leah by Mrs Bandmann Palmer at the Gaiety
Theatre, 46, 47, 48, 49 South King street.


What impression of an absent face did Bloom, arrested, silently recall?

The face of her father, the late Major Brian Cooper Tweedy, Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, of Gibraltar and Rehoboth, Dolphin's Barn.


What recurrent impressions of the same were possible by hypothesis?

Retreating, at the terminus of the Great Northern Railway, Amiens
street, with constant uniform acceleration, along parallel lines
meeting at infinity, if produced: along parallel lines, reproduced from
infinity, with constant uniform retardation, at the terminus of the
Great Northern Railway, Amiens street, returning.


What miscellaneous effects of female personal wearing apparel were
perceived by him?

A pair of new inodorous halfsilk black ladies' hose, a pair of new
violet garters, a pair of outsize ladies' drawers of India mull, cut on
generous lines, redolent of opoponax, jessamine and Muratti's Turkish
cigarettes and containing a long bright steel safety pin, folded
curvilinear, a camisole of batiste with thin lace border, an accordion
underskirt of blue silk moirette, all these objects being disposed
irregularly on the top of a rectangular trunk, quadruple battened,
having capped corners, with multicoloured labels, initialled on its fore
side in white lettering B. C. T. (Brian Cooper Tweedy).


What impersonal objects were perceived?

A commode, one leg fractured, totally covered by square cretonne
cutting, apple design, on which rested a lady's black straw hat.
Orangekeyed ware, bought of Henry Price, basket, fancy goods, chinaware
and ironmongery manufacturer, 21, 22, 23 Moore street, disposed
irregularly on the washstand and floor and consisting of basin, soapdish
and brushtray (on the washstand, together), pitcher and night article
(on the floor, separate).


Bloom's acts?

He deposited the articles of clothing on a chair, removed his remaining
articles of clothing, took from beneath the bolster at the head of the
bed a folded long white nightshirt, inserted his head and arms into the
proper apertures of the nightshirt, removed a pillow from the head to
the foot of the bed, prepared the bedlinen accordingly and entered the
bed.


How?

With circumspection, as invariably when entering an abode (his own or
not his own): with solicitude, the snakespiral springs of the mattress
being old, the brass quoits and pendent viper radii loose and tremulous
under stress and strain: prudently, as entering a lair or ambush of
lust or adders: lightly, the less to disturb: reverently, the bed of
conception and of birth, of consummation of marriage and of breach of
marriage, of sleep and of death.


What did his limbs, when gradually extended, encounter?

New clean bedlinen, additional odours, the presence of a human form,
female, hers, the imprint of a human form, male, not his, some crumbs,
some flakes of potted meat, recooked, which he removed.


If he had smiled why would he have smiled?

To reflect that each one who enters imagines himself to be the first to
enter whereas he is always the last term of a preceding series even if
the first term of a succeeding one, each imagining himself to be first,
last, only and alone whereas he is neither first nor last nor only nor
alone in a series originating in and repeated to infinity.


What preceding series?

Assuming Mulvey to be the first term of his series, Penrose, Bartell
d'Arcy, professor Goodwin, Julius Mastiansky, John Henry Menton, Father
Bernard Corrigan, a farmer at the Royal Dublin Society's Horse Show,
Maggot O'Reilly, Matthew Dillon, Valentine Blake Dillon (Lord Mayor
of Dublin), Christopher Callinan, Lenehan, an Italian organgrinder,
an unknown gentleman in the Gaiety Theatre, Benjamin Dollard, Simon
Dedalus, Andrew (Pisser) Burke, Joseph Cuffe, Wisdom Hely, Alderman John
Hooper, Dr Francis Brady, Father Sebastian of Mount Argus, a bootblack
at the General Post Office, Hugh E. (Blazes) Boylan and so each and so
on to no last term.


What were his reflections concerning the last member of this series and
late occupant of the bed?

Reflections on his vigour (a bounder), corporal proportion (a
billsticker), commercial ability (a bester), impressionability (a
boaster).


Why for the observer impressionability in addition to vigour, corporal
proportion and commercial ability?

Because he had observed with augmenting frequency in the preceding
members of the same series the same concupiscence, inflammably
transmitted, first with alarm, then with understanding, then with
desire, finally with fatigue, with alternating symptoms of epicene
comprehension and apprehension.


With what antagonistic sentiments were his subsequent reflections
affected?

Envy, jealousy, abnegation, equanimity.


Envy?

Of a bodily and mental male organism specially adapted for the
superincumbent posture of energetic human copulation and energetic
piston and cylinder movement necessary for the complete satisfaction of
a constant but not acute concupiscence resident in a bodily and mental
female organism, passive but not obtuse.


Jealousy?

Because a nature full and volatile in its free state, was alternately
the agent and reagent of attraction. Because attraction between agent(s)
and reagent(s) at all instants varied, with inverse proportion of
increase and decrease, with incessant circular extension and radial
reentrance. Because the controlled contemplation of the fluctuation of
attraction produced, if desired, a fluctuation of pleasure.


Abnegation?

In virtue of a) acquaintance initiated in September 1903 in the
establishment of George Mesias, merchant tailor and outfitter, 5 Eden
Quay, b) hospitality extended and received in kind, reciprocated and
reappropriated in person, c) comparative youth subject to impulses of
ambition and magnanimity, colleagual altruism and amorous egoism, d)
extraracial attraction, intraracial inhibition, supraracial prerogative,
e) an imminent provincial musical tour, common current expenses, net
proceeds divided.


Equanimity?

As as natural as any and every natural act of a nature expressed or
understood executed in natured nature by natural creatures in accordance
with his, her and their natured natures, of dissimilar similarity.
As not so calamitous as a cataclysmic annihilation of the planet in
consequence of a collision with a dark sun. As less reprehensible than
theft, highway robbery, cruelty to children and animals, obtaining money
under false pretences, forgery, embezzlement, misappropriation of public
money, betrayal of public trust, malingering, mayhem, corruption of
minors, criminal libel, blackmail, contempt of court, arson, treason,
felony, mutiny on the high seas, trespass, burglary, jailbreaking,
practice of unnatural vice, desertion from armed forces in the field,
perjury, poaching, usury, intelligence with the king's enemies,
impersonation, criminal assault, manslaughter, wilful and premeditated
murder. As not more abnormal than all other parallel processes of
adaptation to altered conditions of existence, resulting in a reciprocal
equilibrium between the bodily organism and its attendant circumstances,
foods, beverages, acquired habits, indulged inclinations, significant
disease. As more than inevitable, irreparable.


Why more abnegation than jealousy, less envy than equanimity?

From outrage (matrimony) to outrage (adultery) there arose nought but
outrage (copulation) yet the matrimonial violator of the matrimonially
violated had not been outraged by the adulterous violator of the
adulterously violated.


What retribution, if any?

Assassination, never, as two wrongs did not make one right. Duel by
combat, no. Divorce, not now. Exposure by mechanical artifice (automatic
bed) or individual testimony (concealed ocular witnesses), not yet. Suit
for damages by legal influence or simulation of assault with evidence of
injuries sustained (selfinflicted), not impossibly. Hushmoney by moral
influence possibly. If any, positively, connivance, introduction of
emulation (material, a prosperous rival agency of publicity: moral,
a successful rival agent of intimacy), depreciation, alienation,
humiliation, separation protecting the one separated from the other,
protecting the separator from both.


By what reflections did he, a conscious reactor against the void of
incertitude, justify to himself his sentiments?

The preordained frangibility of the hymen: the presupposed intangibility
of the thing in itself: the incongruity and disproportion between
the selfprolonging tension of the thing proposed to be done and the
selfabbreviating relaxation of the thing done; the fallaciously inferred
debility of the female: the muscularity of the male: the variations of
ethical codes: the natural grammatical transition by inversion involving
no alteration of sense of an aorist preterite proposition (parsed as
masculine subject, monosyllabic onomatopoeic transitive verb with direct
feminine object) from the active voice into its correlative aorist
preterite proposition (parsed as feminine subject, auxiliary verb
and quasimonosyllabic onomatopoeic past participle with complementary
masculine agent) in the passive voice: the continued product of
seminators by generation: the continual production of semen by
distillation: the futility of triumph or protest or vindication: the
inanity of extolled virtue: the lethargy of nescient matter: the apathy
of the stars.


In what final satisfaction did these antagonistic sentiments and
reflections, reduced to their simplest forms, converge?

Satisfaction at the ubiquity in eastern and western terrestrial
hemispheres, in all habitable lands and islands explored or unexplored
(the land of the midnight sun, the islands of the blessed, the isles of
Greece, the land of promise), of adipose anterior and posterior female
hemispheres, redolent of milk and honey and of excretory sanguine and
seminal warmth, reminiscent of secular families of curves of amplitude,
insusceptible of moods of impression or of contrarieties of expression,
expressive of mute immutable mature animality.


The visible signs of antesatisfaction?

An approximate erection: a solicitous adversion: a gradual elevation: a
tentative revelation: a silent contemplation.


Then?

He kissed the plump mellow yellow smellow melons of her rump, on each
plump melonous hemisphere, in their mellow yellow furrow, with obscure
prolonged provocative melonsmellonous osculation.


The visible signs of postsatisfaction?

A silent contemplation: a tentative velation: a gradual abasement: a
solicitous aversion: a proximate erection.


What followed this silent action?

Somnolent invocation, less somnolent recognition, incipient excitation,
catechetical interrogation.


With what modifications did the narrator reply to this interrogation?

Negative: he omitted to mention the clandestine correspondence between
Martha Clifford and Henry Flower, the public altercation at, in and
in the vicinity of the licensed premises of Bernard Kiernan and Co,
Limited, 8, 9 and 10 Little Britain street, the erotic provocation
and response thereto caused by the exhibitionism of Gertrude (Gerty),
surname unknown. Positive: he included mention of a performance by Mrs
Bandmann Palmer of LEAH at the Gaiety Theatre, 46, 47, 48, 49 South King
street, an invitation to supper at Wynn's (Murphy's) Hotel, 35, 36 and
37 Lower Abbey street, a volume of peccaminous pornographical tendency
entituled SWEETS OF SIN, anonymous author a gentleman of fashion, a
temporary concussion caused by a falsely calculated movement in the
course of a postcenal gymnastic display, the victim (since completely
recovered) being Stephen Dedalus, professor and author, eldest surviving
son of Simon Dedalus, of no fixed occupation, an aeronautical feat
executed by him (narrator) in the presence of a witness, the professor
and author aforesaid, with promptitude of decision and gymnastic
flexibility.


Was the narration otherwise unaltered by modifications?

Absolutely.


Which event or person emerged as the salient point of his narration?

Stephen Dedalus, professor and author.


What limitations of activity and inhibitions of conjugal rights were
perceived by listener and narrator concerning themselves during the
course of this intermittent and increasingly more laconic narration?

By the listener a limitation of fertility inasmuch as marriage had been
celebrated 1 calendar month after the 18th anniversary of her birth (8
September 1870), viz. 8 October, and consummated on the same date with
female issue born 15 June 1889, having been anticipatorily consummated
on the lo September of the same year and complete carnal intercourse,
with ejaculation of semen within the natural female organ, having last
taken place 5 weeks previous, viz. 27 November 1893, to the birth on 29
December 1893 of second (and only male) issue, deceased 9 January 1894,
aged 11 days, there remained a period of 10 years, 5 months and 18 days
during which carnal intercourse had been incomplete, without ejaculation
of semen within the natural female organ. By the narrator a limitation
of activity, mental and corporal, inasmuch as complete mental
intercourse between himself and the listener had not taken place since
the consummation of puberty, indicated by catamenic hemorrhage, of the
female issue of narrator and listener, 15 September 1903, there remained
a period of 9 months and 1 day during which, in consequence of a
preestablished natural comprehension in incomprehension between the
consummated females (listener and issue), complete corporal liberty of
action had been circumscribed.


How?

By various reiterated feminine interrogation concerning the masculine
destination whither, the place where, the time at which, the duration
for which, the object with which in the case of temporary absences,
projected or effected.


What moved visibly above the listener's and the narrator's invisible
thoughts?

The upcast reflection of a lamp and shade, an inconstant series of
concentric circles of varying gradations of light and shadow.


In what directions did listener and narrator lie?

Listener, S. E. by E.: Narrator, N. W. by W.: on the 53rd parallel
of latitude, N., and 6th meridian of longitude, W.: at an angle of 45
degrees to the terrestrial equator.


In what state of rest or motion?

At rest relatively to themselves and to each other. In motion being each
and both carried westward, forward and rereward respectively, by the
proper perpetual motion of the earth through everchanging tracks of
neverchanging space.


In what posture?

Listener: reclined semilaterally, left, left hand under head, right
leg extended in a straight line and resting on left leg, flexed, in the
attitude of Gea-Tellus, fulfilled, recumbent, big with seed. Narrator:
reclined laterally, left, with right and left legs flexed, the index
finger and thumb of the right hand resting on the bridge of the nose, in
the attitude depicted in a snapshot photograph made by Percy Apjohn, the
childman weary, the manchild in the womb.


Womb? Weary?

He rests. He has travelled.


With?

Sinbad the Sailor and Tinbad the Tailor and Jinbad the Jailer and
Whinbad the Whaler and Ninbad the Nailer and Finbad the Failer and
Binbad the Bailer and Pinbad the Pailer and Minbad the Mailer and Hinbad
the Hailer and Rinbad the Railer and Dinbad the Kailer and Vinbad the
Quailer and Linbad the Yailer and Xinbad the Phthailer.


When?

Going to dark bed there was a square round Sinbad the Sailor roc's auk's
egg in the night of the bed of all the auks of the rocs of Darkinbad the
Brightdayler.


Where?



Yes because he never did a thing like that before as ask to get his
breakfast in bed with a couple of eggs since the _City Arms_ hotel
when he used to be pretending to be laid up with a sick voice doing his
highness to make himself interesting for that old faggot Mrs Riordan
that he thought he had a great leg of and she never left us a farthing
all for masses for herself and her soul greatest miser ever was actually
afraid to lay out 4d for her methylated spirit telling me all her
ailments she had too much old chat in her about politics and earthquakes
and the end of the world let us have a bit of fun first God help the
world if all the women were her sort down on bathingsuits and lownecks
of course nobody wanted her to wear them I suppose she was pious because
no man would look at her twice I hope Ill never be like her a wonder
she didnt want us to cover our faces but she was a welleducated woman
certainly and her gabby talk about Mr Riordan here and Mr Riordan there
I suppose he was glad to get shut of her and her dog smelling my fur and
always edging to get up under my petticoats especially then still I like
that in him polite to old women like that and waiters and beggars too
hes not proud out of nothing but not always if ever he got anything
really serious the matter with him its much better for them to go into
a hospital where everything is clean but I suppose Id have to dring it
into him for a month yes and then wed have a hospital nurse next thing
on the carpet have him staying there till they throw him out or a nun
maybe like the smutty photo he has shes as much a nun as Im not yes
because theyre so weak and puling when theyre sick they want a woman
to get well if his nose bleeds youd think it was O tragic and that
dyinglooking one off the south circular when he sprained his foot at
the choir party at the sugarloaf Mountain the day I wore that dress
Miss Stack bringing him flowers the worst old ones she could find at the
bottom of the basket anything at all to get into a mans bedroom with
her old maids voice trying to imagine he was dying on account of her to
never see thy face again though he looked more like a man with his beard
a bit grown in the bed father was the same besides I hate bandaging and
dosing when he cut his toe with the razor paring his corns afraid hed
get bloodpoisoning but if it was a thing I was sick then wed see what
attention only of course the woman hides it not to give all the trouble
they do yes he came somewhere Im sure by his appetite anyway love its
not or hed be off his feed thinking of her so either it was one of those
night women if it was down there he was really and the hotel story he
made up a pack of lies to hide it planning it Hynes kept me who did I
meet ah yes I met do you remember Menton and who else who let me see
that big babbyface I saw him and he not long married flirting with a
young girl at Pooles Myriorama and turned my back on him when he slinked
out looking quite conscious what harm but he had the impudence to make
up to me one time well done to him mouth almighty and his boiled eyes of
all the big stupoes I ever met and thats called a solicitor only for
I hate having a long wrangle in bed or else if its not that its some
little bitch or other he got in with somewhere or picked up on the
sly if they only knew him as well as I do yes because the day before
yesterday he was scribbling something a letter when I came into the
front room to show him Dignams death in the paper as if something told
me and he covered it up with the blottingpaper pretending to be thinking
about business so very probably that was it to somebody who thinks
she has a softy in him because all men get a bit like that at his age
especially getting on to forty he is now so as to wheedle any money she
can out of him no fool like an old fool and then the usual kissing my
bottom was to hide it not that I care two straws now who he does it with
or knew before that way though Id like to find out so long as I dont
have the two of them under my nose all the time like that slut that Mary
we had in Ontario terrace padding out her false bottom to excite him bad
enough to get the smell of those painted women off him once or twice
I had a suspicion by getting him to come near me when I found the
long hair on his coat without that one when I went into the kitchen
pretending he was drinking water 1 woman is not enough for them it was
all his fault of course ruining servants then proposing that she could
eat at our table on Christmas day if you please O no thank you not in my
house stealing my potatoes and the oysters 2/6 per doz going out to see
her aunt if you please common robbery so it was but I was sure he had
something on with that one it takes me to find out a thing like that he
said you have no proof it was her proof O yes her aunt was very fond of
oysters but I told her what I thought of her suggesting me to go out to
be alone with her I wouldnt lower myself to spy on them the garters I
found in her room the Friday she was out that was enough for me a little
bit too much her face swelled up on her with temper when I gave her her
weeks notice I saw to that better do without them altogether do out the
rooms myself quicker only for the damn cooking and throwing out the dirt
I gave it to him anyhow either she or me leaves the house I couldnt even
touch him if I thought he was with a dirty barefaced liar and sloven
like that one denying it up to my face and singing about the place in
the W C too because she knew she was too well off yes because he couldnt
possibly do without it that long so he must do it somewhere and the last
time he came on my bottom when was it the night Boylan gave my hand a
great squeeze going along by the Tolka in my hand there steals another
I just pressed the back of his like that with my thumb to squeeze back
singing the young May moon shes beaming love because he has an idea
about him and me hes not such a fool he said Im dining out and going to
the Gaiety though Im not going to give him the satisfaction in any case
God knows hes a change in a way not to be always and ever wearing the
same old hat unless I paid some nicelooking boy to do it since I cant do
it myself a young boy would like me Id confuse him a little alone with
him if we were Id let him see my garters the new ones and make him turn
red looking at him seduce him I know what boys feel with that down
on their cheek doing that frigging drawing out the thing by the hour
question and answer would you do this that and the other with the
coalman yes with a bishop yes I would because I told him about some dean
or bishop was sitting beside me in the jews temples gardens when I was
knitting that woollen thing a stranger to Dublin what place was it and
so on about the monuments and he tired me out with statues encouraging
him making him worse than he is who is in your mind now tell me who are
you thinking of who is it tell me his name who tell me who the german
Emperor is it yes imagine Im him think of him can you feel him trying to
make a whore of me what he never will he ought to give it up now at this
age of his life simply ruination for any woman and no satisfaction in it
pretending to like it till he comes and then finish it off myself anyway
and it makes your lips pale anyhow its done now once and for all with
all the talk of the world about it people make its only the first time
after that its just the ordinary do it and think no more about it why
cant you kiss a man without going and marrying him first you sometimes
love to wildly when you feel that way so nice all over you you cant help
yourself I wish some man or other would take me sometime when hes there
and kiss me in his arms theres nothing like a kiss long and hot down to
your soul almost paralyses you then I hate that confession when I used
to go to Father Corrigan he touched me father and what harm if he did
where and I said on the canal bank like a fool but whereabouts on your
person my child on the leg behind high up was it yes rather high up was
it where you sit down yes O Lord couldnt he say bottom right out and
have done with it what has that got to do with it and did you whatever
way he put it I forget no father and I always think of the real father
what did he want to know for when I already confessed it to God he had
a nice fat hand the palm moist always I wouldnt mind feeling it neither
would he Id say by the bullneck in his horsecollar I wonder did he know
me in the box I could see his face he couldnt see mine of course hed
never turn or let on still his eyes were red when his father died theyre
lost for a woman of course must be terrible when a man cries let alone
them Id like to be embraced by one in his vestments and the smell of
incense off him like the pope besides theres no danger with a priest if
youre married hes too careful about himself then give something to H
H the pope for a penance I wonder was he satisfied with me one thing I
didnt like his slapping me behind going away so familiarly in the hall
though I laughed Im not a horse or an ass am I I suppose he was thinking
of his fathers I wonder is he awake thinking of me or dreaming am I in
it who gave him that flower he said he bought he smelt of some kind of
drink not whisky or stout or perhaps the sweety kind of paste they stick
their bills up with some liqueur Id like to sip those richlooking green
and yellow expensive drinks those stagedoor johnnies drink with the
opera hats I tasted once with my finger dipped out of that American that
had the squirrel talking stamps with father he had all he could do to
keep himself from falling asleep after the last time after we took the
port and potted meat it had a fine salty taste yes because I felt lovely
and tired myself and fell asleep as sound as a top the moment I popped
straight into bed till that thunder woke me up God be merciful to us
I thought the heavens were coming down about us to punish us when I
blessed myself and said a Hail Mary like those awful thunderbolts in
Gibraltar as if the world was coming to an end and then they come and
tell you theres no God what could you do if it was running and rushing
about nothing only make an act of contrition the candle I lit that
evening in Whitefriars street chapel for the month of May see it brought
its luck though hed scoff if he heard because he never goes to church
mass or meeting he says your soul you have no soul inside only grey
matter because he doesnt know what it is to have one yes when I lit the
lamp because he must have come 3 or 4 times with that tremendous big red
brute of a thing he has I thought the vein or whatever the dickens they
call it was going to burst though his nose is not so big after I took
off all my things with the blinds down after my hours dressing and
perfuming and combing it like iron or some kind of a thick crowbar
standing all the time he must have eaten oysters I think a few dozen he
was in great singing voice no I never in all my life felt anyone had
one the size of that to make you feel full up he must have eaten a whole
sheep after whats the idea making us like that with a big hole in the
middle of us or like a Stallion driving it up into you because thats all
they want out of you with that determined vicious look in his eye I had
to halfshut my eyes still he hasnt such a tremendous amount of spunk in
him when I made him pull out and do it on me considering how big it is
so much the better in case any of it wasnt washed out properly the last
time I let him finish it in me nice invention they made for women for
him to get all the pleasure but if someone gave them a touch of it
themselves theyd know what I went through with Milly nobody would
believe cutting her teeth too and Mina Purefoys husband give us a swing
out of your whiskers filling her up with a child or twins once a year
as regular as the clock always with a smell of children off her the one
they called budgers or something like a nigger with a shock of hair on
it Jesusjack the child is a black the last time I was there a squad of
them falling over one another and bawling you couldnt hear your ears
supposed to be healthy not satisfied till they have us swollen out like
elephants or I dont know what supposing I risked having another not off
him though still if he was married Im sure hed have a fine strong child
but I dont know Poldy has more spunk in him yes thatd be awfully jolly
I suppose it was meeting Josie Powell and the funeral and thinking about
me and Boylan set him off well he can think what he likes now if thatll
do him any good I know they were spooning a bit when I came on the scene
he was dancing and sitting out with her the night of Georgina Simpsons
housewarming and then he wanted to ram it down my neck it was on account
of not liking to see her a wallflower that was why we had the standup
row over politics he began it not me when he said about Our Lord being a
carpenter at last he made me cry of course a woman is so sensitive about
everything I was fuming with myself after for giving in only for I knew
he was gone on me and the first socialist he said He was he annoyed me
so much I couldnt put him into a temper still he knows a lot of mixedup
things especially about the body and the inside I often wanted to study
up that myself what we have inside us in that family physician I could
always hear his voice talking when the room was crowded and watch him
after that I pretended I had a coolness on with her over him because he
used to be a bit on the jealous side whenever he asked who are you going
to and I said over to Floey and he made me the present of Byron's poems
and the three pairs of gloves so that finished that I could quite easily
get him to make it up any time I know how Id even supposing he got in
with her again and was going out to see her somewhere Id know if he
refused to eat the onions I know plenty of ways ask him to tuck down the
collar of my blouse or touch him with my veil and gloves on going out I
kiss then would send them all spinning however alright well see then let
him go to her she of course would only be too delighted to pretend shes
mad in love with him that I wouldnt so much mind Id just go to her and
ask her do you love him and look her square in the eyes she couldnt fool
me but he might imagine he was and make a declaration to her with his
plabbery kind of a manner like he did to me though I had the devils own
job to get it out of him though I liked him for that it showed he could
hold in and wasnt to be got for the asking he was on the pop of asking
me too the night in the kitchen I was rolling the potato cake theres
something I want to say to you only for I put him off letting on I was
in a temper with my hands and arms full of pasty flour in any case I let
out too much the night before talking of dreams so I didnt want to let
him know more than was good for him she used to be always embracing me
Josie whenever he was there meaning him of course glauming me over and
when I said I washed up and down as far as possible asking me and did
you wash possible the women are always egging on to that putting it on
thick when hes there they know by his sly eye blinking a bit putting on
the indifferent when they come out with something the kind he is what
spoils him I dont wonder in the least because he was very handsome at
that time trying to look like Lord Byron I said I liked though he
was too beautiful for a man and he was a little before we got engaged
afterwards though she didnt like it so much the day I was in fits of
laughing with the giggles I couldnt stop about all my hairpins falling
out one after another with the mass of hair I had youre always in great
humour she said yes because it grigged her because she knew what it
meant because I used to tell her a good bit of what went on between us
not all but just enough to make her mouth water but that wasnt my fault
she didnt darken the door much after we were married I wonder what shes
got like now after living with that dotty husband of hers she had her
face beginning to look drawn and run down the last time I saw her she
must have been just after a row with him because I saw on the moment she
was edging to draw down a conversation about husbands and talk about him
to run him down what was it she told me O yes that sometimes he used to
go to bed with his muddy boots on when the maggot takes him just imagine
having to get into bed with a thing like that that might murder you
any moment what a man well its not the one way everyone goes mad Poldy
anyhow whatever he does always wipes his feet on the mat when he comes
in wet or shine and always blacks his own boots too and he always takes
off his hat when he comes up in the street like then and now hes going
about in his slippers to look for 10000 pounds for a postcard U p up
O sweetheart May wouldnt a thing like that simply bore you stiff to
extinction actually too stupid even to take his boots off now what
could you make of a man like that Id rather die 20 times over than marry
another of their sex of course hed never find another woman like me to
put up with him the way I do know me come sleep with me yes and he knows
that too at the bottom of his heart take that Mrs Maybrick that poisoned
her husband for what I wonder in love with some other man yes it was
found out on her wasnt she the downright villain to go and do a thing
like that of course some men can be dreadfully aggravating drive you mad
and always the worst word in the world what do they ask us to marry them
for if were so bad as all that comes to yes because they cant get on
without us white Arsenic she put in his tea off flypaper wasnt it I
wonder why they call it that if I asked him hed say its from the Greek
leave us as wise as we were before she must have been madly in love with
the other fellow to run the chance of being hanged O she didnt care if
that was her nature what could she do besides theyre not brutes enough
to go and hang a woman surely are they

theyre all so different Boylan talking about the shape of my foot he
noticed at once even before he was introduced when I was in the D B C
with Poldy laughing and trying to listen I was waggling my foot we both
ordered 2 teas and plain bread and butter I saw him looking with his
two old maids of sisters when I stood up and asked the girl where it was
what do I care with it dropping out of me and that black closed breeches
he made me buy takes you half an hour to let them down wetting all
myself always with some brandnew fad every other week such a long one I
did I forgot my suede gloves on the seat behind that I never got after
some robber of a woman and he wanted me to put it in the Irish times
lost in the ladies lavatory D B C Dame street finder return to Mrs
Marion Bloom and I saw his eyes on my feet going out through the turning
door he was looking when I looked back and I went there for tea 2 days
after in the hope but he wasnt now how did that excite him because I was
crossing them when we were in the other room first he meant the shoes
that are too tight to walk in my hand is nice like that if I only had a
ring with the stone for my month a nice aquamarine Ill stick him for one
and a gold bracelet I dont like my foot so much still I made him spend
once with my foot the night after Goodwins botchup of a concert so cold
and windy it was well we had that rum in the house to mull and the fire
wasnt black out when he asked to take off my stockings lying on the
hearthrug in Lombard street west and another time it was my muddy boots
hed like me to walk in all the horses dung I could find but of course
hes not natural like the rest of the world that I what did he say I
could give 9 points in 10 to Katty Lanner and beat her what does that
mean I asked him I forget what he said because the stoppress edition
just passed and the man with the curly hair in the Lucan dairy thats so
polite I think I saw his face before somewhere I noticed him when I was
tasting the butter so I took my time Bartell dArcy too that he used to
make fun of when he commenced kissing me on the choir stairs after I
sang Gounods _Ave Maria_ what are we waiting for O my heart kiss me
straight on the brow and part which is my brown part he was pretty hot
for all his tinny voice too my low notes he was always raving about if
you can believe him I liked the way he used his mouth singing then he
said wasnt it terrible to do that there in a place like that I dont see
anything so terrible about it Ill tell him about that some day not now
and surprise him ay and Ill take him there and show him the very place
too we did it so now there you are like it or lump it he thinks nothing
can happen without him knowing he hadnt an idea about my mother till we
were engaged otherwise hed never have got me so cheap as he did he was
lo times worse himself anyhow begging me to give him a tiny bit cut off
my drawers that was the evening coming along Kenilworth square he kissed
me in the eye of my glove and I had to take it off asking me questions
is it permitted to enquire the shape of my bedroom so I let him keep it
as if I forgot it to think of me when I saw him slip it into his pocket
of course hes mad on the subject of drawers thats plain to be seen
always skeezing at those brazenfaced things on the bicycles with their
skirts blowing up to their navels even when Milly and I were out with
him at the open air fete that one in the cream muslin standing right
against the sun so he could see every atom she had on when he saw me
from behind following in the rain I saw him before he saw me however
standing at the corner of the Harolds cross road with a new raincoat on
him with the muffler in the Zingari colours to show off his complexion
and the brown hat looking slyboots as usual what was he doing there
where hed no business they can go and get whatever they like from
anything at all with a skirt on it and were not to ask any questions but
they want to know where were you where are you going I could feel him
coming along skulking after me his eyes on my neck he had been keeping
away from the house he felt it was getting too warm for him so I
halfturned and stopped then he pestered me to say yes till I took off my
glove slowly watching him he said my openwork sleeves were too cold for
the rain anything for an excuse to put his hand anear me drawers drawers
the whole blessed time till I promised to give him the pair off my doll
to carry about in his waistcoat pocket _O Maria Santisima_ he did look
a big fool dreeping in the rain splendid set of teeth he had made me
hungry to look at them and beseeched of me to lift the orange petticoat
I had on with the sunray pleats that there was nobody he said hed kneel
down in the wet if I didnt so persevering he would too and ruin his new
raincoat you never know what freak theyd take alone with you theyre so
savage for it if anyone was passing so I lifted them a bit and touched
his trousers outside the way I used to Gardner after with my ring hand
to keep him from doing worse where it was too public I was dying to find
out was he circumcised he was shaking like a jelly all over they want
to do everything too quick take all the pleasure out of it and father
waiting all the time for his dinner he told me to say I left my purse in
the butchers and had to go back for it what a Deceiver then he wrote me
that letter with all those words in it how could he have the face to any
woman after his company manners making it so awkward after when we met
asking me have I offended you with my eyelids down of course he saw I
wasnt he had a few brains not like that other fool Henny Doyle he was
always breaking or tearing something in the charades I hate an unlucky
man and if I knew what it meant of course I had to say no for form sake
dont understand you I said and wasnt it natural so it is of course
it used to be written up with a picture of a womans on that wall in
Gibraltar with that word I couldnt find anywhere only for children
seeing it too young then writing every morning a letter sometimes twice
a day I liked the way he made love then he knew the way to take a woman
when he sent me the 8 big poppies because mine was the 8th then I wrote
the night he kissed my heart at Dolphins barn I couldnt describe it
simply it makes you feel like nothing on earth but he never knew how to
embrace well like Gardner I hope hell come on Monday as he said at the
same time four I hate people who come at all hours answer the door you
think its the vegetables then its somebody and you all undressed or
the door of the filthy sloppy kitchen blows open the day old frostyface
Goodwin called about the concert in Lombard street and I just after
dinner all flushed and tossed with boiling old stew dont look at me
professor I had to say Im a fright yes but he was a real old gent in his
way it was impossible to be more respectful nobody to say youre out you
have to peep out through the blind like the messengerboy today I thought
it was a putoff first him sending the port and the peaches first and I
was just beginning to yawn with nerves thinking he was trying to make a
fool of me when I knew his tattarrattat at the door he must have been
a bit late because it was l/4 after 3 when I saw the 2 Dedalus girls
coming from school I never know the time even that watch he gave me
never seems to go properly Id want to get it looked after when I threw
the penny to that lame sailor for England home and beauty when I was
whistling there is a charming girl I love and I hadnt even put on my
clean shift or powdered myself or a thing then this day week were to go
to Belfast just as well he has to go to Ennis his fathers anniversary
the 27th it wouldnt be pleasant if he did suppose our rooms at the hotel
were beside each other and any fooling went on in the new bed I couldnt
tell him to stop and not bother me with him in the next room or perhaps
some protestant clergyman with a cough knocking on the wall then hed
never believe the next day we didnt do something its all very well a
husband but you cant fool a lover after me telling him we never did
anything of course he didnt believe me no its better hes going where
he is besides something always happens with him the time going to the
Mallow concert at Maryborough ordering boiling soup for the two of
us then the bell rang out he walks down the platform with the soup
splashing about taking spoonfuls of it hadnt he the nerve and the waiter
after him making a holy show of us screeching and confusion for the
engine to start but he wouldnt pay till he finished it the two gentlemen
in the 3rd class carriage said he was quite right so he was too hes so
pigheaded sometimes when he gets a thing into his head a good job he was
able to open the carriage door with his knife or theyd have taken us on
to Cork I suppose that was done out of revenge on him O I love jaunting
in a train or a car with lovely soft cushions I wonder will he take
a 1st class for me he might want to do it in the train by tipping the
guard well O I suppose therell be the usual idiots of men gaping at
us with their eyes as stupid as ever they can possibly be that was an
exceptional man that common workman that left us alone in the carriage
that day going to Howth Id like to find out something about him l or 2
tunnels perhaps then you have to look out of the window all the nicer
then coming back suppose I never came back what would they say eloped
with him that gets you on on the stage the last concert I sang at where
its over a year ago when was it St Teresas hall Clarendon St little
chits of missies they have now singing Kathleen Kearney and her like
on account of father being in the army and my singing the absentminded
beggar and wearing a brooch for Lord Roberts when I had the map of it
all and Poldy not Irish enough was it him managed it this time I wouldnt
put it past him like he got me on to sing in the _Stabat Mater_ by going
around saying he was putting Lead Kindly Light to music I put him up to
that till the jesuits found out he was a freemason thumping the piano
lead Thou me on copied from some old opera yes and he was going about
with some of them Sinner Fein lately or whatever they call themselves
talking his usual trash and nonsense he says that little man he showed
me without the neck is very intelligent the coming man Griffiths is he
well he doesnt look it thats all I can say still it must have been him
he knew there was a boycott I hate the mention of their politics after
the war that Pretoria and Ladysmith and Bloemfontein where Gardner lieut
Stanley G 8th Bn 2nd East Lancs Rgt of enteric fever he was a lovely
fellow in khaki and just the right height over me Im sure he was brave
too he said I was lovely the evening we kissed goodbye at the canal lock
my Irish beauty he was pale with excitement about going away or wed be
seen from the road he couldnt stand properly and I so hot as I never
felt they could have made their peace in the beginning or old oom Paul
and the rest of the other old Krugers go and fight it out between them
instead of dragging on for years killing any finelooking men there were
with their fever if he was even decently shot it wouldnt have been so
bad I love to see a regiment pass in review the first time I saw the
Spanish cavalry at La Roque it was lovely after looking across the bay
from Algeciras all the lights of the rock like fireflies or those sham
battles on the 15 acres the Black Watch with their kilts in time at the
march past the 10th hussars the prince of Wales own or the lancers O the
lancers theyre grand or the Dublins that won Tugela his father made his
money over selling the horses for the cavalry well he could buy me a
nice present up in Belfast after what I gave him theyve lovely linen up
there or one of those nice kimono things I must buy a mothball like I
had before to keep in the drawer with them it would be exciting going
round with him shopping buying those things in a new city better leave
this ring behind want to keep turning and turning to get it over the
knuckle there or they might bell it round the town in their papers or
tell the police on me but theyd think were married O let them all go and
smother themselves for the fat lot I care he has plenty of money and hes
not a marrying man so somebody better get it out of him if I could find
out whether he likes me I looked a bit washy of course when I looked
close in the handglass powdering a mirror never gives you the expression
besides scrooching down on me like that all the time with his big
hipbones hes heavy too with his hairy chest for this heat always having
to lie down for them better for him put it into me from behind the way
Mrs Mastiansky told me her husband made her like the dogs do it and
stick out her tongue as far as ever she could and he so quiet and mild
with his tingating cither can you ever be up to men the way it takes
them lovely stuff in that blue suit he had on and stylish tie and socks
with the skyblue silk things on them hes certainly well off I know by
the cut his clothes have and his heavy watch but he was like a perfect
devil for a few minutes after he came back with the stoppress tearing up
the tickets and swearing blazes because he lost 20 quid he said he lost
over that outsider that won and half he put on for me on account of
Lenehans tip cursing him to the lowest pits that sponger he was making
free with me after the Glencree dinner coming back that long joult over
the featherbed mountain after the lord Mayor looking at me with his
dirty eyes Val Dillon that big heathen I first noticed him at dessert
when I was cracking the nuts with my teeth I wished I could have picked
every morsel of that chicken out of my fingers it was so tasty
and browned and as tender as anything only for I didnt want to eat
everything on my plate those forks and fishslicers were hallmarked
silver too I wish I had some I could easily have slipped a couple into
my muff when I was playing with them then always hanging out of them for
money in a restaurant for the bit you put down your throat we have to
be thankful for our mangy cup of tea itself as a great compliment to be
noticed the way the world is divided in any case if its going to go on I
want at least two other good chemises for one thing and but I dont know
what kind of drawers he likes none at all I think didnt he say yes and
half the girls in Gibraltar never wore them either naked as God made
them that Andalusian singing her Manola she didnt make much secret of
what she hadnt yes and the second pair of silkette stockings is laddered
after one days wear I could have brought them back to Lewers this
morning and kicked up a row and made that one change them only not to
upset myself and run the risk of walking into him and ruining the whole
thing and one of those kidfitting corsets Id want advertised cheap in
the Gentlewoman with elastic gores on the hips he saved the one I have
but thats no good what did they say they give a delightful figure line
11/6 obviating that unsightly broad appearance across the lower back to
reduce flesh my belly is a bit too big Ill have to knock off the
stout at dinner or am I getting too fond of it the last they sent from
ORourkes was as flat as a pancake he makes his money easy Larry they
call him the old mangy parcel he sent at Xmas a cottage cake and a
bottle of hogwash he tried to palm off as claret that he couldnt get
anyone to drink God spare his spit for fear hed die of the drouth or
I must do a few breathing exercises I wonder is that antifat any good
might overdo it the thin ones are not so much the fashion now garters
that much I have the violet pair I wore today thats all he bought me
out of the cheque he got on the first O no there was the face lotion
I finished the last of yesterday that made my skin like new I told him
over and over again get that made up in the same place and dont forget
it God only knows whether he did after all I said to him 111 know by
the bottle anyway if not I suppose 111 only have to wash in my piss like
beeftea or chickensoup with some of that opoponax and violet I thought
it was beginning to look coarse or old a bit the skin underneath is much
finer where it peeled off there on my finger after the burn its a pity
it isnt all like that and the four paltry handkerchiefs about 6/- in all
sure you cant get on in this world without style all going in food and
rent when I get it Ill lash it around I tell you in fine style I always
want to throw a handful of tea into the pot measuring and mincing if
I buy a pair of old brogues itself do you like those new shoes yes how
much were they Ive no clothes at all the brown costume and the skirt and
jacket and the one at the cleaners 3 whats that for any woman cutting
up this old hat and patching up the other the men wont look at you and
women try to walk on you because they know youve no man then with all
the things getting dearer every day for the 4 years more I have of life
up to 35 no Im what am I at all 111 be 33 in September will I what O
well look at that Mrs Galbraith shes much older than me I saw her when
I was out last week her beautys on the wane she was a lovely woman
magnificent head of hair on her down to her waist tossing it back like
that like Kitty OShea in Grantham street 1st thing I did every morning
to look across see her combing it as if she loved it and was full of it
pity I only got to know her the day before we left and that Mrs Langtry
the jersey lily the prince of Wales was in love with I suppose hes like
the first man going the roads only for the name of a king theyre all
made the one way only a black mans Id like to try a beauty up to what
was she 45 there was some funny story about the jealous old husband what
was it at all and an oyster knife he went no he made her wear a kind
of a tin thing round her and the prince of Wales yes he had the oyster
knife cant be true a thing like that like some of those books he brings
me the works of Master Francois Somebody supposed to be a priest about
a child born out of her ear because her bumgut fell out a nice word for
any priest to write and her a--e as if any fool wouldnt know what that
meant I hate that pretending of all things with that old blackguards
face on him anybody can see its not true and that Ruby and Fair Tyrants
he brought me that twice I remember when I came to page 5 o the part
about where she hangs him up out of a hook with a cord flagellate
sure theres nothing for a woman in that all invention made up about he
drinking the champagne out of her slipper after the ball was over like
the infant Jesus in the crib at Inchicore in the Blessed Virgins arms
sure no woman could have a child that big taken out of her and I thought
first it came out of her side because how could she go to the chamber
when she wanted to and she a rich lady of course she felt honoured H R H
he was in Gibraltar the year I was born I bet he found lilies there too
where he planted the tree he planted more than that in his time he might
have planted me too if hed come a bit sooner then I wouldnt be here as
I am he ought to chuck that Freeman with the paltry few shillings
he knocks out of it and go into an office or something where hed get
regular pay or a bank where they could put him up on a throne to count
the money all the day of course he prefers plottering about the house
so you cant stir with him any side whats your programme today I wish hed
even smoke a pipe like father to get the smell of a man or pretending
to be mooching about for advertisements when he could have been in Mr
Cuffes still only for what he did then sending me to try and patch it up
I could have got him promoted there to be the manager he gave me a great
mirada once or twice first he was as stiff as the mischief really and
truly Mrs Bloom only I felt rotten simply with the old rubbishy dress
that I lost the leads out of the tails with no cut in it but theyre
coming into fashion again I bought it simply to please him I knew it was
no good by the finish pity I changed my mind of going to Todd and Bums
as I said and not Lees it was just like the shop itself rummage sale a
lot of trash I hate those rich shops get on your nerves nothing kills me
altogether only he thinks he knows a great lot about a womans dress and
cooking mathering everything he can scour off the shelves into it if
I went by his advices every blessed hat I put on does that suit me yes
take that thats alright the one like a weddingcake standing up miles
off my head he said suited me or the dishcover one coming down on my
backside on pins and needles about the shopgirl in that place in Grafton
street I had the misfortune to bring him into and she as insolent as
ever she could be with her smirk saying Im afraid were giving you too
much trouble what shes there for but I stared it out of her yes he was
awfully stiff and no wonder but he changed the second time he looked
Poldy pigheaded as usual like the soup but I could see him looking very
hard at my chest when he stood up to open the door for me it was nice of
him to show me out in any case Im extremely sorry Mrs Bloom believe me
without making it too marked the first time after him being insulted and
me being supposed to be his wife I just half smiled I know my chest was
out that way at the door when he said Im extremely sorry and Im sure you
were

yes I think he made them a bit firmer sucking them like that so long he
made me thirsty titties he calls them I had to laugh yes this one anyhow
stiff the nipple gets for the least thing Ill get him to keep that up
and Ill take those eggs beaten up with marsala fatten them out for him
what are all those veins and things curious the way its made 2 the same
in case of twins theyre supposed to represent beauty placed up there
like those statues in the museum one of them pretending to hide it with
her hand are they so beautiful of course compared with what a man looks
like with his two bags full and his other thing hanging down out of
him or sticking up at you like a hatrack no wonder they hide it with a
cabbageleaf that disgusting Cameron highlander behind the meat market or
that other wretch with the red head behind the tree where the statue
of the fish used to be when I was passing pretending he was pissing
standing out for me to see it with his babyclothes up to one side the
Queens own they were a nice lot its well the Surreys relieved them
theyre always trying to show it to you every time nearly I passed
outside the mens greenhouse near the Harcourt street station just to
try some fellow or other trying to catch my eye as if it was I of the
7 wonders of the world O and the stink of those rotten places the night
coming home with Poldy after the Comerfords party oranges and lemonade
to make you feel nice and watery I went into r of them it was so biting
cold I couldnt keep it when was that 93 the canal was frozen yes it was
a few months after a pity a couple of the Camerons werent there to see
me squatting in the mens place meadero I tried to draw a picture of
it before I tore it up like a sausage or something I wonder theyre not
afraid going about of getting a kick or a bang of something there the
woman is beauty of course thats admitted when he said I could pose for a
picture naked to some rich fellow in Holles street when he lost the
job in Helys and I was selling the clothes and strumming in the coffee
palace would I be like that bath of the nymph with my hair down yes only
shes younger or Im a little like that dirty bitch in that Spanish photo
he has nymphs used they go about like that I asked him about her and
that word met something with hoses in it and he came out with some
jawbreakers about the incarnation he never can explain a thing simply
the way a body can understand then he goes and burns the bottom out of
the pan all for his Kidney this one not so much theres the mark of his
teeth still where he tried to bite the nipple I had to scream out arent
they fearful trying to hurt you I had a great breast of milk with Milly
enough for two what was the reason of that he said I could have got a
pound a week as a wet nurse all swelled out the morning that delicate
looking student that stopped in no 28 with the Citrons Penrose nearly
caught me washing through the window only for I snapped up the towel to
my face that was his studenting hurt me they used to weaning her till he
got doctor Brady to give me the belladonna prescription I had to get him
to suck them they were so hard he said it was sweeter and thicker than
cows then he wanted to milk me into the tea well hes beyond everything I
declare somebody ought to put him in the budget if I only could remember
the I half of the things and write a book out of it the works of Master
Poldy yes and its so much smoother the skin much an hour he was at them
Im sure by the clock like some kind of a big infant I had at me they
want everything in their mouth all the pleasure those men get out of a
woman I can feel his mouth O Lord I must stretch myself I wished he was
here or somebody to let myself go with and come again like that I feel
all fire inside me or if I could dream it when he made me spend the 2nd
time tickling me behind with his finger I was coming for about 5 minutes
with my legs round him I had to hug him after O Lord I wanted to shout
out all sorts of things fuck or shit or anything at all only not to look
ugly or those lines from the strain who knows the way hed take it you
want to feel your way with a man theyre not all like him thank God some
of them want you to be so nice about it I noticed the contrast he does
it and doesnt talk I gave my eyes that look with my hair a bit loose
from the tumbling and my tongue between my lips up to him the savage
brute Thursday Friday one Saturday two Sunday three O Lord I cant wait
till Monday

frseeeeeeeefronnnng train somewhere whistling the strength those engines
have in them like big giants and the water rolling all over and out of
them all sides like the end of Loves old sweeeetsonnnng the poor men
that have to be out all the night from their wives and families in those
roasting engines stifling it was today Im glad I burned the half of
those old Freemans and Photo Bits leaving things like that lying about
hes getting very careless and threw the rest of them up in the W C 111
get him to cut them tomorrow for me instead of having them there for
the next year to get a few pence for them have him asking wheres last
Januarys paper and all those old overcoats I bundled out of the hall
making the place hotter than it is that rain was lovely and refreshing
just after my beauty sleep I thought it was going to get like Gibraltar
my goodness the heat there before the levanter came on black as night
and the glare of the rock standing up in it like a big giant compared
with their 3 Rock mountain they think is so great with the red sentries
here and there the poplars and they all whitehot and the smell of the
rainwater in those tanks watching the sun all the time weltering down on
you faded all that lovely frock fathers friend Mrs Stanhope sent me from
the B Marche paris what a shame my dearest Doggerina she wrote on it
she was very nice whats this her other name was just a p c to tell you I
sent the little present have just had a jolly warm bath and feel a very
clean dog now enjoyed it wogger she called him wogger wd give anything
to be back in Gib and hear you sing Waiting and in old Madrid Concone
is the name of those exercises he bought me one of those new some word
I couldnt make out shawls amusing things but tear for the least thing
still there lovely I think dont you will always think of the lovely teas
we had together scrumptious currant scones and raspberry wafers I adore
well now dearest Doggerina be sure and write soon kind she left out
regards to your father also captain Grove with love yrs affly Hester x
x x x x she didnt look a bit married just like a girl he was years older
than her wogger he was awfully fond of me when he held down the wire
with his foot for me to step over at the bullfight at La Linea when
that matador Gomez was given the bulls ear these clothes we have to wear
whoever invented them expecting you to walk up Killiney hill then for
example at that picnic all staysed up you cant do a blessed thing in
them in a crowd run or jump out of the way thats why I was afraid when
that other ferocious old Bull began to charge the banderilleros with
the sashes and the 2 things in their hats and the brutes of men shouting
bravo toro sure the women were as bad in their nice white mantillas
ripping all the whole insides out of those poor horses I never heard of
such a thing in all my life yes he used to break his heart at me taking
off the dog barking in bell lane poor brute and it sick what became
of them ever I suppose theyre dead long ago the 2 of them its like all
through a mist makes you feel so old I made the scones of course I had
everything all to myself then a girl Hester we used to compare our hair
mine was thicker than hers she showed me how to settle it at the back
when I put it up and whats this else how to make a knot on a thread with
the one hand we were like cousins what age was I then the night of the
storm I slept in her bed she had her arms round me then we were fighting
in the morning with the pillow what fun he was watching me whenever he
got an opportunity at the band on the Alameda esplanade when I was with
father and captain Grove I looked up at the church first and then at the
windows then down and our eyes met I felt something go through me like
all needles my eyes were dancing I remember after when I looked
at myself in the glass hardly recognised myself the change he was
attractive to a girl in spite of his being a little bald intelligent
looking disappointed and gay at the same time he was like Thomas in
the shadow of Ashlydyat I had a splendid skin from the sun and the
excitement like a rose I didnt get a wink of sleep it wouldnt have been
nice on account of her but I could have stopped it in time she gave me
the Moonstone to read that was the first I read of Wilkie Collins East
Lynne I read and the shadow of Ashlydyat Mrs Henry Wood Henry Dunbar by
that other woman I lent him afterwards with Mulveys photo in it so as he
see I wasnt without and Lord Lytton Eugene Aram Molly bawn she gave me
by Mrs Hungerford on account of the name I dont like books with a Molly
in them like that one he brought me about the one from Flanders a whore
always shoplifting anything she could cloth and stuff and yards of it
O this blanket is too heavy on me thats better I havent even one decent
nightdress this thing gets all rolled under me besides him and his
fooling thats better I used to be weltering then in the heat my shift
drenched with the sweat stuck in the cheeks of my bottom on the chair
when I stood up they were so fattish and firm when I got up on the sofa
cushions to see with my clothes up and the bugs tons of them at night
and the mosquito nets I couldnt read a line Lord how long ago it seems
centuries of course they never came back and she didnt put her address
right on it either she may have noticed her wogger people were always
going away and we never I remember that day with the waves and the
boats with their high heads rocking and the smell of ship those Officers
uniforms on shore leave made me seasick he didnt say anything he was
very serious I had the high buttoned boots on and my skirt was blowing
she kissed me six or seven times didnt I cry yes I believe I did or near
it my lips were taittering when I said goodbye she had a Gorgeous wrap
of some special kind of blue colour on her for the voyage made very
peculiarly to one side like and it was extremely pretty it got as dull
as the devil after they went I was almost planning to run away mad out
of it somewhere were never easy where we are father or aunt or marriage
waiting always waiting to guiiiide him toooo me waiting nor speeeed
his flying feet their damn guns bursting and booming all over the shop
especially the Queens birthday and throwing everything down in all
directions if you didnt open the windows when general Ulysses Grant
whoever he was or did supposed to be some great fellow landed off the
ship and old Sprague the consul that was there from before the flood
dressed up poor man and he in mourning for the son then the same old
bugles for reveille in the morning and drums rolling and the unfortunate
poor devils of soldiers walking about with messtins smelling the place
more than the old longbearded jews in their jellibees and levites
assembly and sound clear and gunfire for the men to cross the lines and
the warden marching with his keys to lock the gates and the bagpipes and
only captain Groves and father talking about Rorkes drift and Plevna and
sir Garnet Wolseley and Gordon at Khartoum lighting their pipes for
them everytime they went out drunken old devil with his grog on the
windowsill catch him leaving any of it picking his nose trying to think
of some other dirty story to tell up in a corner but he never forgot
himself when I was there sending me out of the room on some blind excuse
paying his compliments the Bushmills whisky talking of course but hed
do the same to the next woman that came along I suppose he died of
galloping drink ages ago the days like years not a letter from a living
soul except the odd few I posted to myself with bits of paper in them so
bored sometimes I could fight with my nails listening to that old Arab
with the one eye and his heass of an instrument singing his heah heah
aheah all my compriments on your hotchapotch of your heass as bad as now
with the hands hanging off me looking out of the window if there was a
nice fellow even in the opposite house that medical in Holles street the
nurse was after when I put on my gloves and hat at the window to show
I was going out not a notion what I meant arent they thick never
understand what you say even youd want to print it up on a big poster
for them not even if you shake hands twice with the left he didnt
recognise me either when I half frowned at him outside Westland row
chapel where does their great intelligence come in Id like to know
grey matter they have it all in their tail if you ask me those country
gougers up in the City Arms intelligence they had a damn sight less than
the bulls and cows they were selling the meat and the coalmans bell that
noisy bugger trying to swindle me with the wrong bill he took out of his
hat what a pair of paws and pots and pans and kettles to mend any broken
bottles for a poor man today and no visitors or post ever except his
cheques or some advertisement like that wonderworker they sent him
addressed dear Madam only his letter and the card from Milly this
morning see she wrote a letter to him who did I get the last letter from
O Mrs Dwenn now what possessed her to write from Canada after so many
years to know the recipe I had for pisto madrileno Floey Dillon since
she wrote to say she was married to a very rich architect if Im to
believe all I hear with a villa and eight rooms her father was an
awfully nice man he was near seventy always goodhumoured well now Miss
Tweedy or Miss Gillespie theres the piannyer that was a solid silver
coffee service he had too on the mahogany sideboard then dying so far
away I hate people that have always their poor story to tell everybody
has their own troubles that poor Nancy Blake died a month ago of acute
neumonia well I didnt know her so well as all that she was Floeys friend
more than mine poor Nancy its a bother having to answer he always tells
me the wrong things and no stops to say like making a speech your sad
bereavement symphathy I always make that mistake and newphew with 2
double yous in I hope hell write me a longer letter the next time if its
a thing he really likes me O thanks be to the great God I got somebody
to give me what I badly wanted to put some heart up into me youve no
chances at all in this place like you used long ago I wish somebody
would write me a loveletter his wasnt much and I told him he could write
what he liked yours ever Hugh Boylan in old Madrid stuff silly women
believe love is sighing I am dying still if he wrote it I suppose thered
be some truth in it true or no it fills up your whole day and life
always something to think about every moment and see it all round you
like a new world I could write the answer in bed to let him imagine me
short just a few words not those long crossed letters Atty Dillon used
to write to the fellow that was something in the four courts that jilted
her after out of the ladies letterwriter when I told her to say a few
simple words he could twist how he liked not acting with precipat precip
itancy with equal candour the greatest earthly happiness answer to a
gentlemans proposal affirmatively my goodness theres nothing else its
all very fine for them but as for being a woman as soon as youre old
they might as well throw you out in the bottom of the ashpit.

Mulveys was the first when I was in bed that morning and Mrs Rubio
brought it in with the coffee she stood there standing when I asked her
to hand me and I pointing at them I couldnt think of the word a hairpin
to open it with ah horquilla disobliging old thing and it staring her
in the face with her switch of false hair on her and vain about her
appearance ugly as she was near 80 or a loo her face a mass of wrinkles
with all her religion domineering because she never could get over the
Atlantic fleet coming in half the ships of the world and the Union Jack
flying with all her carabineros because 4 drunken English sailors took
all the rock from them and because I didnt run into mass often enough in
Santa Maria to please her with her shawl up on her except when there was
a marriage on with all her miracles of the saints and her black blessed
virgin with the silver dress and the sun dancing 3 times on Easter
Sunday morning and when the priest was going by with the bell bringing
the vatican to the dying blessing herself for his Majestad an admirer
he signed it I near jumped out of my skin I wanted to pick him up when
I saw him following me along the Calle Real in the shop window then
he tipped me just in passing but I never thought hed write making an
appointment I had it inside my petticoat bodice all day reading it up
in every hole and corner while father was up at the drill instructing to
find out by the handwriting or the language of stamps singing I remember
shall I wear a white rose and I wanted to put on the old stupid clock to
near the time he was the first man kissed me under the Moorish wall my
sweetheart when a boy it never entered my head what kissing meant till
he put his tongue in my mouth his mouth was sweetlike young I put my
knee up to him a few times to learn the way what did I tell him I was
engaged for for fun to the son of a Spanish nobleman named Don Miguel de
la Flora and he believed me that I was to be married to him in 3 years
time theres many a true word spoken in jest there is a flower that
bloometh a few things I told him true about myself just for him to be
imagining the Spanish girls he didnt like I suppose one of them wouldnt
have him I got him excited he crushed all the flowers on my bosom he
brought me he couldnt count the pesetas and the perragordas till I
taught him Cappoquin he came from he said on the black water but it was
too short then the day before he left May yes it was May when the infant
king of Spain was born Im always like that in the spring Id like a new
fellow every year up on the tiptop under the rockgun near OHaras tower
I told him it was struck by lightning and all about the old Barbary apes
they sent to Clapham without a tail careering all over the show on each
others back Mrs Rubio said she was a regular old rock scorpion robbing
the chickens out of Inces farm and throw stones at you if you went anear
he was looking at me I had that white blouse on open in the front to
encourage him as much as I could without too openly they were just
beginning to be plump I said I was tired we lay over the firtree cove
a wild place I suppose it must be the highest rock in existence the
galleries and casemates and those frightful rocks and Saint Michaels
cave with the icicles or whatever they call them hanging down and
ladders all the mud plotching my boots Im sure thats the way down the
monkeys go under the sea to Africa when they die the ships out far like
chips that was the Malta boat passing yes the sea and the sky you could
do what you liked lie there for ever he caressed them outside they love
doing that its the roundness there I was leaning over him with my white
ricestraw hat to take the newness out of it the left side of my face the
best my blouse open for his last day transparent kind of shirt he had I
could see his chest pink he wanted to touch mine with his for a moment
but I wouldnt lee him he was awfully put out first for fear you never
know consumption or leave me with a child embarazada that old servant
Ines told me that one drop even if it got into you at all after I tried
with the Banana but I was afraid it might break and get lost up in me
somewhere because they once took something down out of a woman that was
up there for years covered with limesalts theyre all mad to get in there
where they come out of youd think they could never go far enough up and
then theyre done with you in a way till the next time yes because theres
a wonderful feeling there so tender all the time how did we finish it
off yes O yes I pulled him off into my handkerchief pretending not to
be excited but I opened my legs I wouldnt let him touch me inside my
petticoat because I had a skirt opening up the side I tormented the
life out of him first tickling him I loved rousing that dog in the hotel
rrrsssstt awokwokawok his eyes shut and a bird flying below us he was
shy all the same I liked him like that moaning I made him blush a little
when I got over him that way when I unbuttoned him and took his out and
drew back the skin it had a kind of eye in it theyre all Buttons men
down the middle on the wrong side of them Molly darling he called me
what was his name Jack Joe Harry Mulvey was it yes I think a lieutenant
he was rather fair he had a laughing kind of a voice so I went round to
the whatyoucallit everything was whatyoucallit moustache had he he said
hed come back Lord its just like yesterday to me and if I was married
hed do it to me and I promised him yes faithfully Id let him block me
now flying perhaps hes dead or killed or a captain or admiral its nearly
20 years if I said firtree cove he would if he came up behind me and
put his hands over my eyes to guess who I might recognise him hes young
still about 40 perhaps hes married some girl on the black water and is
quite changed they all do they havent half the character a woman has she
little knows what I did with her beloved husband before he ever dreamt
of her in broad daylight too in the sight of the whole world you might
say they could have put an article about it in the Chronicle I was a bit
wild after when I blew out the old bag the biscuits were in from Benady
Bros and exploded it Lord what a bang all the woodcocks and pigeons
screaming coming back the same way that we went over middle hill round
by the old guardhouse and the jews burialplace pretending to read out
the Hebrew on them I wanted to fire his pistol he said he hadnt one he
didnt know what to make of me with his peak cap on that he always wore
crooked as often as I settled it straight H M S Calypso swinging my hat
that old Bishop that spoke off the altar his long preach about womans
higher functions about girls now riding the bicycle and wearing peak
caps and the new woman bloomers God send him sense and me more money I
suppose theyre called after him I never thought that would be my
name Bloom when I used to write it in print to see how it looked on a
visiting card or practising for the butcher and oblige M Bloom youre
looking blooming Josie used to say after I married him well its better
than Breen or Briggs does brig or those awful names with bottom in them
Mrs Ramsbottom or some other kind of a bottom Mulvey I wouldnt go mad
about either or suppose I divorced him Mrs Boylan my mother whoever she
was might have given me a nicer name the Lord knows after the lovely
one she had Lunita Laredo the fun we had running along Williss road to
Europa point twisting in and out all round the other side of Jersey they
were shaking and dancing about in my blouse like Millys little ones now
when she runs up the stairs I loved looking down at them I was jumping
up at the pepper trees and the white poplars pulling the leaves off and
throwing them at him he went to India he was to write the voyages those
men have to make to the ends of the world and back its the least they
might get a squeeze or two at a woman while they can going out to be
drowned or blown up somewhere I went up Windmill hill to the flats
that Sunday morning with captain Rubios that was dead spyglass like the
sentry had he said hed have one or two from on board I wore that frock
from the B Marche paris and the coral necklace the straits shining I
could see over to Morocco almost the bay of Tangier white and the Atlas
mountain with snow on it and the straits like a river so clear Harry
Molly darling I was thinking of him on the sea all the time after at
mass when my petticoat began to slip down at the elevation weeks and
weeks I kept the handkerchief under my pillow for the smell of him there
was no decent perfume to be got in that Gibraltar only that cheap peau
dEspagne that faded and left a stink on you more than anything else I
wanted to give him a memento he gave me that clumsy Claddagh ring for
luck that I gave Gardner going to south Africa where those Boers killed
him with their war and fever but they were well beaten all the same as
if it brought its bad luck with it like an opal or pearl still it must
have been pure 18 carrot gold because it was very heavy but what could
you get in a place like that the sandfrog shower from Africa and that
derelict ship that came up to the harbour Marie the Marie whatyoucallit
no he hadnt a moustache that was Gardner yes I can see his face
cleanshaven Frseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeefrong that train again weeping tone
once in the dear deaead days beyondre call close my eyes breath my lips
forward kiss sad look eyes open piano ere oer the world the mists began
I hate that istsbeg comes loves sweet sooooooooooong Ill let that out
full when I get in front of the footlights again Kathleen Kearney
and her lot of squealers Miss This Miss That Miss Theother lot of
sparrowfarts skitting around talking about politics they know as much
about as my backside anything in the world to make themselves someway
interesting Irish homemade beauties soldiers daughter am I ay and whose
are you bootmakers and publicans I beg your pardon coach I thought you
were a wheelbarrow theyd die down dead off their feet if ever they got
a chance of walking down the Alameda on an officers arm like me on the
bandnight my eyes flash my bust that they havent passion God help their
poor head I knew more about men and life when I was I S than theyll all
know at 50 they dont know how to sing a song like that Gardner said no
man could look at my mouth and teeth smiling like that and not think of
it I was afraid he mightnt like my accent first he so English all father
left me in spite of his stamps Ive my mothers eyes and figure anyhow
he always said theyre so snotty about themselves some of those cads he
wasnt a bit like that he was dead gone on my lips let them get a husband
first thats fit to be looked at and a daughter like mine or see if they
can excite a swell with money that can pick and choose whoever he wants
like Boylan to do it 4 or 5 times locked in each others arms or the
voice either I could have been a prima donna only I married him comes
looooves old deep down chin back not too much make it double My Ladys
Bower is too long for an encore about the moated grange at twilight and
vaunted rooms yes Ill sing Winds that blow from the south that he gave
after the choirstairs performance Ill change that lace on my black dress
to show off my bubs and Ill yes by God Ill get that big fan mended make
them burst with envy my hole is itching me always when I think of him I
feel I want to I feel some wind in me better go easy not wake him have
him at it again slobbering after washing every bit of myself back belly
and sides if we had even a bath itself or my own room anyway I wish hed
sleep in some bed by himself with his cold feet on me give us room even
to let a fart God or do the least thing better yes hold them like that
a bit on my side piano quietly sweeeee theres that train far away
pianissimo eeeee one more song

that was a relief wherever you be let your wind go free who knows if
that pork chop I took with my cup of tea after was quite good with the
heat I couldnt smell anything off it Im sure that queerlooking man in
the porkbutchers is a great rogue I hope that lamp is not smoking fill
my nose up with smuts better than having him leaving the gas on all
night I couldnt rest easy in my bed in Gibraltar even getting up to see
why am I so damned nervous about that though I like it in the winter its
more company O Lord it was rotten cold too that winter when I was
only about ten was I yes I had the big doll with all the funny clothes
dressing her up and undressing that icy wind skeeting across from those
mountains the something Nevada sierra nevada standing at the fire with
the little bit of a short shift I had up to heat myself I loved dancing
about in it then make a race back into bed Im sure that fellow opposite
used to be there the whole time watching with the lights out in the
summer and I in my skin hopping around I used to love myself then
stripped at the washstand dabbing and creaming only when it came to the
chamber performance I put out the light too so then there were 2 of us
goodbye to my sleep for this night anyhow I hope hes not going to get in
with those medicals leading him astray to imagine hes young again coming
in at 4 in the morning it must be if not more still he had the manners
not to wake me what do they find to gabber about all night squandering
money and getting drunker and drunker couldnt they drink water then he
starts giving us his orders for eggs and tea and Findon haddy and hot
buttered toast I suppose well have him sitting up like the king of
the country pumping the wrong end of the spoon up and down in his egg
wherever he learned that from and I love to hear him falling up the
stairs of a morning with the cups rattling on the tray and then play
with the cat she rubs up against you for her own sake I wonder has she
fleas shes as bad as a woman always licking and lecking but I hate their
claws I wonder do they see anything that we cant staring like that when
she sits at the top of the stairs so long and listening as I wait always
what a robber too that lovely fresh place I bought I think Ill get a bit
of fish tomorrow or today is it Friday yes I will with some blancmange
with black currant jam like long ago not those 2 lb pots of mixed plum
and apple from the London and Newcastle Williams and Woods goes twice as
far only for the bones I hate those eels cod yes Ill get a nice piece
of cod Im always getting enough for 3 forgetting anyway Im sick of that
everlasting butchers meat from Buckleys loin chops and leg beef and rib
steak and scrag of mutton and calfs pluck the very name is enough or
a picnic suppose we all gave 5/- each and or let him pay it and invite
some other woman for him who Mrs Fleming and drove out to the furry glen
or the strawberry beds wed have him examining all the horses toenails
first like he does with the letters no not with Boylan there yes with
some cold veal and ham mixed sandwiches there are little houses down
at the bottom of the banks there on purpose but its as hot as blazes he
says not a bank holiday anyhow I hate those ruck of Mary Ann coalboxes
out for the day Whit Monday is a cursed day too no wonder that bee bit
him better the seaside but Id never again in this life get into a boat
with him after him at Bray telling the boatman he knew how to row if
anyone asked could he ride the steeplechase for the gold cup hed say
yes then it came on to get rough the old thing crookeding about and the
weight all down my side telling me pull the right reins now pull the
left and the tide all swamping in floods in through the bottom and his
oar slipping out of the stirrup its a mercy we werent all drowned he can
swim of course me no theres no danger whatsoever keep yourself calm in
his flannel trousers Id like to have tattered them down off him before
all the people and give him what that one calls flagellate till he was
black and blue do him all the good in the world only for that longnosed
chap I dont know who he is with that other beauty Burke out of the City
Arms hotel was there spying around as usual on the slip always where he
wasnt wanted if there was a row on youd vomit a better face there was no
love lost between us thats 1 consolation I wonder what kind is that book
he brought me Sweets of Sin by a gentleman of fashion some other Mr de
Kock I suppose the people gave him that nickname going about with his
tube from one woman to another I couldnt even change my new white shoes
all ruined with the saltwater and the hat I had with that feather all
blowy and tossed on me how annoying and provoking because the smell of
the sea excited me of course the sardines and the bream in Catalan bay
round the back of the rock they were fine all silver in the fishermens
baskets old Luigi near a hundred they said came from Genoa and the tall
old chap with the earrings I dont like a man you have to climb up to to
get at I suppose theyre all dead and rotten long ago besides I dont like
being alone in this big barracks of a place at night I suppose Ill have
to put up with it I never brought a bit of salt in even when we moved
in the confusion musical academy he was going to make on the first floor
drawingroom with a brassplate or Blooms private hotel he suggested go
and ruin himself altogether the way his father did down in Ennis like
all the things he told father he was going to do and me but I saw
through him telling me all the lovely places we could go for the
honeymoon Venice by moonlight with the gondolas and the lake of Como he
had a picture cut out of some paper of and mandolines and lanterns O
how nice I said whatever I liked he was going to do immediately if
not sooner will you be my man will you carry my can he ought to get a
leather medal with a putty rim for all the plans he invents then leaving
us here all day youd never know what old beggar at the door for a crust
with his long story might be a tramp and put his foot in the way to
prevent me shutting it like that picture of that hardened criminal he
was called in Lloyds Weekly news 20 years in jail then he comes out and
murders an old woman for her money imagine his poor wife or mother or
whoever she is such a face youd run miles away from I couldnt rest easy
till I bolted all the doors and windows to make sure but its worse again
being locked up like in a prison or a madhouse they ought to be all shot
or the cat of nine tails a big brute like that that would attack a poor
old woman to murder her in her bed Id cut them off him so I would not
that hed be much use still better than nothing the night I was sure
I heard burglars in the kitchen and he went down in his shirt with a
candle and a poker as if he was looking for a mouse as white as a sheet
frightened out of his wits making as much noise as he possibly could
for the burglars benefit there isnt much to steal indeed the Lord knows
still its the feeling especially now with Milly away such an idea for
him to send the girl down there to learn to take photographs on account
of his grandfather instead of sending her to Skerrys academy where shed
have to learn not like me getting all IS at school only hed do a thing
like that all the same on account of me and Boylan thats why he did
it Im certain the way he plots and plans everything out I couldnt turn
round with her in the place lately unless I bolted the door first gave
me the fidgets coming in without knocking first when I put the chair
against the door just as I was washing myself there below with the glove
get on your nerves then doing the loglady all day put her in a glasscase
with two at a time to look at her if he knew she broke off the hand off
that little gimcrack statue with her roughness and carelessness before
she left that I got that little Italian boy to mend so that you cant
see the join for 2 shillings wouldnt even teem the potatoes for you of
course shes right not to ruin her hands I noticed he was always talking
to her lately at the table explaining things in the paper and she
pretending to understand sly of course that comes from his side of the
house he cant say I pretend things can he Im too honest as a matter of
fact and helping her into her coat but if there was anything wrong with
her its me shed tell not him I suppose he thinks Im finished out and
laid on the shelf well Im not no nor anything like it well see well see
now shes well on for flirting too with Tom Devans two sons imitating
me whistling with those romps of Murray girls calling for her can Milly
come out please shes in great demand to pick what they can out of her
round in Nelson street riding Harry Devans bicycle at night its as well
he sent her where she is she was just getting out of bounds wanting to
go on the skatingrink and smoking their cigarettes through their nose I
smelt it off her dress when I was biting off the thread of the button
I sewed on to the bottom of her jacket she couldnt hide much from me I
tell you only I oughtnt to have stitched it and it on her it brings a
parting and the last plumpudding too split in 2 halves see it comes out
no matter what they say her tongue is a bit too long for my taste
your blouse is open too low she says to me the pan calling the kettle
blackbottom and I had to tell her not to cock her legs up like that on
show on the windowsill before all the people passing they all look at
her like me when I was her age of course any old rag looks well on
you then a great touchmenot too in her own way at the Only Way in the
Theatre royal take your foot away out of that I hate people touching
me afraid of her life Id crush her skirt with the pleats a lot of that
touching must go on in theatres in the crush in the dark theyre always
trying to wiggle up to you that fellow in the pit at the Gaiety for
Beerbohm Tree in Trilby the last time Ill ever go there to be squashed
like that for any Trilby or her barebum every two minutes tipping me
there and looking away hes a bit daft I think I saw him after trying to
get near two stylishdressed ladies outside Switzers window at the same
little game I recognised him on the moment the face and everything but
he didnt remember me yes and she didnt even want me to kiss her at the
Broadstone going away well I hope shell get someone to dance attendance
on her the way I did when she was down with the mumps and her glands
swollen wheres this and wheres that of course she cant feel anything
deep yet I never came properly till I was what 22 or so it went into the
wrong place always only the usual girls nonsense and giggling that
Conny Connolly writing to her in white ink on black paper sealed with
sealingwax though she clapped when the curtain came down because he
looked so handsome then we had Martin Harvey for breakfast dinner and
supper I thought to myself afterwards it must be real love if a man
gives up his life for her that way for nothing I suppose there are a
few men like that left its hard to believe in it though unless it really
happened to me the majority of them with not a particle of love in their
natures to find two people like that nowadays full up of each other that
would feel the same way as you do theyre usually a bit foolish in the
head his father must have been a bit queer to go and poison himself
after her still poor old man I suppose he felt lost shes always making
love to my things too the few old rags I have wanting to put her hair up
at I S my powder too only ruin her skin on her shes time enough for that
all her life after of course shes restless knowing shes pretty with her
lips so red a pity they wont stay that way I was too but theres no use
going to the fair with the thing answering me like a fishwoman when
I asked to go for a half a stone of potatoes the day we met Mrs Joe
Gallaher at the trottingmatches and she pretended not to see us in her
trap with Friery the solicitor we werent grand enough till I gave her 2
damn fine cracks across the ear for herself take that now for answering
me like that and that for your impudence she had me that exasperated of
course contradicting I was badtempered too because how was it there was
a weed in the tea or I didnt sleep the night before cheese I ate was it
and I told her over and over again not to leave knives crossed like that
because she has nobody to command her as she said herself well if he
doesnt correct her faith I will that was the last time she turned on the
teartap I was just like that myself they darent order me about the place
its his fault of course having the two of us slaving here instead of
getting in a woman long ago am I ever going to have a proper servant
again of course then shed see him coming Id have to let her know or shed
revenge it arent they a nuisance that old Mrs Fleming you have to be
walking round after her putting the things into her hands sneezing and
farting into the pots well of course shes old she cant help it a good
job I found that rotten old smelly dishcloth that got lost behind the
dresser I knew there was something and opened the area window to let out
the smell bringing in his friends to entertain them like the night he
walked home with a dog if you please that might have been mad especially
Simon Dedalus son his father such a criticiser with his glasses up with
his tall hat on him at the cricket match and a great big hole in his
sock one thing laughing at the other and his son that got all those
prizes for whatever he won them in the intermediate imagine climbing
over the railings if anybody saw him that knew us I wonder he didnt tear
a big hole in his grand funeral trousers as if the one nature gave wasnt
enough for anybody hawking him down into the dirty old kitchen now is he
right in his head I ask pity it wasnt washing day my old pair of drawers
might have been hanging up too on the line on exhibition for all hed
ever care with the ironmould mark the stupid old bundle burned on them
he might think was something else and she never even rendered down the
fat I told her and now shes going such as she was on account of her
paralysed husband getting worse theres always something wrong with them
disease or they have to go under an operation or if its not that its
drink and he beats her Ill have to hunt around again for someone every
day I get up theres some new thing on sweet God sweet God well when Im
stretched out dead in my grave I suppose 111 have some peace I want to
get up a minute if Im let wait O Jesus wait yes that thing has come on
me yes now wouldnt that afflict you of course all the poking and rooting
and ploughing he had up in me now what am I to do Friday Saturday Sunday
wouldnt that pester the soul out of a body unless he likes it some men
do God knows theres always something wrong with us 5 days every 3 or 4
weeks usual monthly auction isnt it simply sickening that night it came
on me like that the one and only time we were in a box that Michael Gunn
gave him to see Mrs Kendal and her husband at the Gaiety something he
did about insurance for him in Drimmies I was fit to be tied though I
wouldnt give in with that gentleman of fashion staring down at me with
his glasses and him the other side of me talking about Spinoza and his
soul thats dead I suppose millions of years ago I smiled the best I
could all in a swamp leaning forward as if I was interested having to
sit it out then to the last tag I wont forget that wife of Scarli in
a hurry supposed to be a fast play about adultery that idiot in the
gallery hissing the woman adulteress he shouted I suppose he went and
had a woman in the next lane running round all the back ways after
to make up for it I wish he had what I had then hed boo I bet the cat
itself is better off than us have we too much blood up in us or what O
patience above its pouring out of me like the sea anyhow he didnt make
me pregnant as big as he is I dont want to ruin the clean sheets I just
put on I suppose the clean linen I wore brought it on too damn it damn
it and they always want to see a stain on the bed to know youre a virgin
for them all thats troubling them theyre such fools too you could be a
widow or divorced 40 times over a daub of red ink would do or blackberry
juice no thats too purply O Jamesy let me up out of this pooh sweets of
sin whoever suggested that business for women what between clothes and
cooking and children this damned old bed too jingling like the dickens
I suppose they could hear us away over the other side of the park till I
suggested to put the quilt on the floor with the pillow under my bottom
I wonder is it nicer in the day I think it is easy I think Ill cut
all this hair off me there scalding me I might look like a young girl
wouldnt he get the great suckin the next time he turned up my clothes on
me Id give anything to see his face wheres the chamber gone easy Ive a
holy horror of its breaking under me after that old commode I wonder
was I too heavy sitting on his knee I made him sit on the easychair
purposely when I took off only my blouse and skirt first in the other
room he was so busy where he oughtnt to be he never felt me I hope my
breath was sweet after those kissing comfits easy God I remember one
time I could scout it out straight whistling like a man almost easy O
Lord how noisy I hope theyre bubbles on it for a wad of money from some
fellow 111 have to perfume it in the morning dont forget I bet he
never saw a better pair of thighs than that look how white they are the
smoothest place is right there between this bit here how soft like a
peach easy God I wouldnt mind being a man and get up on a lovely woman
O Lord what a row youre making like the jersey lily easy easy O how the
waters come down at Lahore

who knows is there anything the matter with my insides or have I
something growing in me getting that thing like that every week when was
it last I Whit Monday yes its only about 3 weeks I ought to go to the
doctor only it would be like before I married him when I had that white
thing coming from me and Floey made me go to that dry old stick Dr
Collins for womens diseases on Pembroke road your vagina he called it I
suppose thats how he got all the gilt mirrors and carpets getting round
those rich ones off Stephens green running up to him for every little
fiddlefaddle her vagina and her cochinchina theyve money of course so
theyre all right I wouldnt marry him not if he was the last man in
the world besides theres something queer about their children always
smelling around those filthy bitches all sides asking me if what I did
had an offensive odour what did he want me to do but the one thing gold
maybe what a question if I smathered it all over his wrinkly old face
for him with all my compriments I suppose hed know then and could you
pass it easily pass what I thought he was talking about the rock of
Gibraltar the way he put it thats a very nice invention too by the
way only I like letting myself down after in the hole as far as I can
squeeze and pull the chain then to flush it nice cool pins and needles
still theres something in it I suppose I always used to know by Millys
when she was a child whether she had worms or not still all the same
paying him for that how much is that doctor one guinea please and asking
me had I frequent omissions where do those old fellows get all the words
they have omissions with his shortsighted eyes on me cocked sideways I
wouldnt trust him too far to give me chloroform or God knows what else
still I liked him when he sat down to write the thing out frowning so
severe his nose intelligent like that you be damned you lying strap O
anything no matter who except an idiot he was clever enough to spot
that of course that was all thinking of him and his mad crazy letters
my Precious one everything connected with your glorious Body everything
underlined that comes from it is a thing of beauty and of joy for ever
something he got out of some nonsensical book that he had me always at
myself 4 and 5 times a day sometimes and I said I hadnt are you sure
O yes I said I am quite sure in a way that shut him up I knew what was
coming next only natural weakness it was he excited me I dont know how
the first night ever we met when I was living in Rehoboth terrace we
stood staring at one another for about lo minutes as if we met somewhere
I suppose on account of my being jewess looking after my mother he used
to amuse me the things he said with the half sloothering smile on him
and all the Doyles said he was going to stand for a member of Parliament
O wasnt I the born fool to believe all his blather about home rule
and the land league sending me that long strool of a song out of the
Huguenots to sing in French to be more classy O beau pays de la Touraine
that I never even sang once explaining and rigmaroling about religion
and persecution he wont let you enjoy anything naturally then might he
as a great favour the very 1st opportunity he got a chance in Brighton
square running into my bedroom pretending the ink got on his hands to
wash it off with the Albion milk and sulphur soap I used to use and the
gelatine still round it O I laughed myself sick at him that day I better
not make an alnight sitting on this affair they ought to make chambers a
natural size so that a woman could sit on it properly he kneels down to
do it I suppose there isnt in all creation another man with the habits
he has look at the way hes sleeping at the foot of the bed how can he
without a hard bolster its well he doesnt kick or he might knock out
all my teeth breathing with his hand on his nose like that Indian god
he took me to show one wet Sunday in the museum in Kildare street all
yellow in a pinafore lying on his side on his hand with his ten toes
sticking out that he said was a bigger religion than the jews and
Our Lords both put together all over Asia imitating him as hes always
imitating everybody I suppose he used to sleep at the foot of the bed
too with his big square feet up in his wifes mouth damn this stinking
thing anyway wheres this those napkins are ah yes I know I hope the old
press doesnt creak ah I knew it would hes sleeping hard had a good time
somewhere still she must have given him great value for his money of
course he has to pay for it from her O this nuisance of a thing I hope
theyll have something better for us in the other world tying ourselves
up God help us thats all right for tonight now the lumpy old jingly
bed always reminds me of old Cohen I suppose he scratched himself in it
often enough and he thinks father bought it from Lord Napier that I used
to admire when I was a little girl because I told him easy piano O
I like my bed God here we are as bad as ever after 16 years how many
houses were we in at all Raymond terrace and Ontario terrace and Lombard
street and Holles street and he goes about whistling every time were on
the run again his huguenots or the frogs march pretending to help the
men with our 4 sticks of furniture and then the City Arms hotel worse
and worse says Warden Daly that charming place on the landing always
somebody inside praying then leaving all their stinks after them
always know who was in there last every time were just getting on right
something happens or he puts his big foot in it Thoms and Helys and Mr
Cuffes and Drimmies either hes going to be run into prison over his old
lottery tickets that was to be all our salvations or he goes and gives
impudence well have him coming home with the sack soon out of the
Freeman too like the rest on account of those Sinner Fein or the
freemasons then well see if the little man he showed me dribbling
along in the wet all by himself round by Coadys lane will give him much
consolation that he says is so capable and sincerely Irish he is indeed
judging by the sincerity of the trousers I saw on him wait theres
Georges church bells wait 3 quarters the hour l wait 2 oclock well
thats a nice hour of the night for him to be coming home at to anybody
climbing down into the area if anybody saw him Ill knock him off that
little habit tomorrow first Ill look at his shirt to see or Ill see if
he has that French letter still in his pocketbook I suppose he thinks I
dont know deceitful men all their 20 pockets arent enough for their lies
then why should we tell them even if its the truth they dont believe you
then tucked up in bed like those babies in the Aristocrats Masterpiece
he brought me another time as if we hadnt enough of that in real life
without some old Aristocrat or whatever his name is disgusting you more
with those rotten pictures children with two heads and no legs thats the
kind of villainy theyre always dreaming about with not another thing in
their empty heads they ought to get slow poison the half of them then
tea and toast for him buttered on both sides and newlaid eggs I suppose
Im nothing any more when I wouldnt let him lick me in Holles street one
night man man tyrant as ever for the one thing he slept on the floor
half the night naked the way the jews used when somebody dies belonged
to them and wouldnt eat any breakfast or speak a word wanting to be
petted so I thought I stood out enough for one time and let him he does
it all wrong too thinking only of his own pleasure his tongue is too
flat or I dont know what he forgets that wethen I dont Ill make him do
it again if he doesnt mind himself and lock him down to sleep in the
coalcellar with the blackbeetles I wonder was it her Josie off her head
with my castoffs hes such a born liar too no hed never have the courage
with a married woman thats why he wants me and Boylan though as for her
Denis as she calls him that forlornlooking spectacle you couldnt call
him a husband yes its some little bitch hes got in with even when I was
with him with Milly at the College races that Hornblower with the childs
bonnet on the top of his nob let us into by the back way he was throwing
his sheeps eyes at those two doing skirt duty up and down I tried to
wink at him first no use of course and thats the way his money goes this
is the fruits of Mr Paddy Dignam yes they were all in great style at the
grand funeral in the paper Boylan brought in if they saw a real officers
funeral thatd be something reversed arms muffled drums the poor horse
walking behind in black L Boom and Tom Kernan that drunken little
barrelly man that bit his tongue off falling down the mens W C drunk
in some place or other and Martin Cunningham and the two Dedaluses and
Fanny MCoys husband white head of cabbage skinny thing with a turn in
her eye trying to sing my songs shed want to be born all over again and
her old green dress with the lowneck as she cant attract them any other
way like dabbling on a rainy day I see it all now plainly and they call
that friendship killing and then burying one another and they all with
their wives and families at home more especially Jack Power keeping that
barmaid he does of course his wife is always sick or going to be sick
or just getting better of it and hes a goodlooking man still though
hes getting a bit grey over the ears theyre a nice lot all of them well
theyre not going to get my husband again into their clutches if I can
help it making fun of him then behind his back I know well when he goes
on with his idiotics because he has sense enough not to squander every
penny piece he earns down their gullets and looks after his wife and
family goodfornothings poor Paddy Dignam all the same Im sorry in a
way for him what are his wife and 5 children going to do unless he was
insured comical little teetotum always stuck up in some pub corner and
her or her son waiting Bill Bailey wont you please come home her widows
weeds wont improve her appearance theyre awfully becoming though if
youre goodlooking what men wasnt he yes he was at the Glencree dinner
and Ben Dollard base barreltone the night he borrowed the swallowtail
to sing out of in Holles street squeezed and squashed into them and
grinning all over his big Dolly face like a wellwhipped childs botty
didnt he look a balmy ballocks sure enough that must have been a
spectacle on the stage imagine paying 5/- in the preserved seats for
that to see him trotting off in his trowlers and Simon Dedalus too he
was always turning up half screwed singing the second verse first the
old love is the new was one of his so sweetly sang the maiden on the
hawthorn bough he was always on for flirtyfying too when I sang Maritana
with him at Freddy Mayers private opera he had a delicious glorious
voice Phoebe dearest goodbye _sweet_heart sweetheart he always sang it
not like Bartell Darcy sweet tart goodbye of course he had the gift of
the voice so there was no art in it all over you like a warm showerbath
O Maritana wildwood flower we sang splendidly though it was a bit too
high for my register even transposed and he was married at the time to
May Goulding but then hed say or do something to knock the good out of
it hes a widower now I wonder what sort is his son he says hes an author
and going to be a university professor of Italian and Im to take lessons
what is he driving at now showing him my photo its not good of me I
ought to have got it taken in drapery that never looks out of fashion
still I look young in it I wonder he didnt make him a present of it
altogether and me too after all why not I saw him driving down to the
Kingsbridge station with his father and mother I was in mourning thats
11 years ago now yes hed be 11 though what was the good in going into
mourning for what was neither one thing nor the other the first cry was
enough for me I heard the deathwatch too ticking in the wall of course
he insisted hed go into mourning for the cat I suppose hes a man now by
this time he was an innocent boy then and a darling little fellow in his
lord Fauntleroy suit and curly hair like a prince on the stage when I
saw him at Mat Dillons he liked me too I remember they all do wait by
God yes wait yes hold on he was on the cards this morning when I laid
out the deck union with a young stranger neither dark nor fair you met
before I thought it meant him but hes no chicken nor a stranger either
besides my face was turned the other way what was the 7th card after
that the 10 of spades for a journey by land then there was a letter on
its way and scandals too the 3 queens and the 8 of diamonds for a rise
in society yes wait it all came out and 2 red 8s for new garments look
at that and didnt I dream something too yes there was something about
poetry in it I hope he hasnt long greasy hair hanging into his eyes or
standing up like a red Indian what do they go about like that for only
getting themselves and their poetry laughed at I always liked poetry
when I was a girl first I thought he was a poet like lord Byron and not
an ounce of it in his composition I thought he was quite different I
wonder is he too young hes about wait 88 I was married 88 Milly is 15
yesterday 89 what age was he then at Dillons 5 or 6 about 88 I suppose
hes 20 or more Im not too old for him if hes 23 or 24 I hope hes not
that stuckup university student sort no otherwise he wouldnt go sitting
down in the old kitchen with him taking Eppss cocoa and talking of
course he pretended to understand it all probably he told him he was
out of Trinity college hes very young to be a professor I hope hes not
a professor like Goodwin was he was a potent professor of John Jameson
they all write about some woman in their poetry well I suppose he wont
find many like me where softly sighs of love the light guitar where
poetry is in the air the blue sea and the moon shining so beautifully
coming back on the nightboat from Tarifa the lighthouse at Europa point
the guitar that fellow played was so expressive will I ever go back
there again all new faces two glancing eyes a lattice hid Ill sing that
for him theyre my eyes if hes anything of a poet two eyes as darkly
bright as loves own star arent those beautiful words as loves young star
itll be a change the Lord knows to have an intelligent person to talk
to about yourself not always listening to him and Billy Prescotts ad
and Keyess ad and Tom the Devils ad then if anything goes wrong in their
business we have to suffer Im sure hes very distinguished Id like to
meet a man like that God not those other ruck besides hes young those
fine young men I could see down in Margate strand bathingplace from the
side of the rock standing up in the sun naked like a God or something
and then plunging into the sea with them why arent all men like that
thered be some consolation for a woman like that lovely little statue he
bought I could look at him all day long curly head and his shoulders
his finger up for you to listen theres real beauty and poetry for you
I often felt I wanted to kiss him all over also his lovely young cock
there so simple I wouldnt mind taking him in my mouth if nobody was
looking as if it was asking you to suck it so clean and white he looks
with his boyish face I would too in 1/2 a minute even if some of it went
down what its only like gruel or the dew theres no danger besides hed
be so clean compared with those pigs of men I suppose never dream of
washing it from I years end to the other the most of them only thats
what gives the women the moustaches Im sure itll be grand if I can only
get in with a handsome young poet at my age Ill throw them the 1st thing
in the morning till I see if the wishcard comes out or Ill try pairing
the lady herself and see if he comes out Ill read and study all I can
find or learn a bit off by heart if I knew who he likes so he wont think
me stupid if he thinks all women are the same and I can teach him the
other part Ill make him feel all over him till he half faints under
me then hell write about me lover and mistress publicly too with our 2
photographs in all the papers when he becomes famous O but then what am
I going to do about him though

no thats no way for him has he no manners nor no refinement nor no
nothing in his nature slapping us behind like that on my bottom because
I didnt call him Hugh the ignoramus that doesnt know poetry from a
cabbage thats what you get for not keeping them in their proper place
pulling off his shoes and trousers there on the chair before me so
barefaced without even asking permission and standing out that vulgar
way in the half of a shirt they wear to be admired like a priest or a
butcher or those old hypocrites in the time of Julius Caesar of course
hes right enough in his way to pass the time as a joke sure you might
as well be in bed with what with a lion God Im sure hed have something
better to say for himself an old Lion would O well I suppose its because
they were so plump and tempting in my short petticoat he couldnt resist
they excite myself sometimes its well for men all the amount of pleasure
they get off a womans body were so round and white for them always I
wished I was one myself for a change just to try with that thing they
have swelling up on you so hard and at the same time so soft when you
touch it my uncle John has a thing long I heard those cornerboys saying
passing the comer of Marrowbone lane my aunt Mary has a thing hairy
because it was dark and they knew a girl was passing it didnt make me
blush why should it either its only nature and he puts his thing long
into my aunt Marys hairy etcetera and turns out to be you put the handle
in a sweepingbrush men again all over they can pick and choose what they
please a married woman or a fast widow or a girl for their different
tastes like those houses round behind Irish street no but were to be
always chained up theyre not going to be chaining me up no damn fear
once I start I tell you for their stupid husbands jealousy why cant we
all remain friends over it instead of quarrelling her husband found it
out what they did together well naturally and if he did can he undo it
hes coronado anyway whatever he does and then he going to the other
mad extreme about the wife in Fair Tyrants of course the man never even
casts a 2nd thought on the husband or wife either its the woman he wants
and he gets her what else were we given all those desires for Id like to
know I cant help it if Im young still can I its a wonder Im not an old
shrivelled hag before my time living with him so cold never embracing
me except sometimes when hes asleep the wrong end of me not knowing I
suppose who he has any man thatd kiss a womans bottom Id throw my hat at
him after that hed kiss anything unnatural where we havent I atom of any
kind of expression in us all of us the same 2 lumps of lard before ever
Id do that to a man pfooh the dirty brutes the mere thought is enough
I kiss the feet of you senorita theres some sense in that didnt he kiss
our halldoor yes he did what a madman nobody understands his cracked
ideas but me still of course a woman wants to be embraced 20 times a day
almost to make her look young no matter by who so long as to be in love
or loved by somebody if the fellow you want isnt there sometimes by the
Lord God I was thinking would I go around by the quays there some dark
evening where nobodyd know me and pick up a sailor off the sea thatd be
hot on for it and not care a pin whose I was only do it off up in a gate
somewhere or one of those wildlooking gipsies in Rathfarnham had their
camp pitched near the Bloomfield laundry to try and steal our things if
they could I only sent mine there a few times for the name model
laundry sending me back over and over some old ones odd stockings that
blackguardlooking fellow with the fine eyes peeling a switch attack me
in the dark and ride me up against the wall without a word or a murderer
anybody what they do themselves the fine gentlemen in their silk hats
that K C lives up somewhere this way coming out of Hardwicke lane the
night he gave us the fish supper on account of winning over the boxing
match of course it was for me he gave it I knew him by his gaiters and
the walk and when I turned round a minute after just to see there was
a woman after coming out of it too some filthy prostitute then he goes
home to his wife after that only I suppose the half of those sailors are
rotten again with disease O move over your big carcass out of that for
the love of Mike listen to him the winds that waft my sighs to thee so
well he may sleep and sigh the great Suggester Don Poldo de la Flora if
he knew how he came out on the cards this morning hed have something to
sigh for a dark man in some perplexity between 2 7s too in prison for
Lord knows what he does that I dont know and Im to be slooching around
down in the kitchen to get his lordship his breakfast while hes rolled
up like a mummy will I indeed did you ever see me running Id just like
to see myself at it show them attention and they treat you like dirt
I dont care what anybody says itd be much better for the world to be
governed by the women in it you wouldnt see women going and killing one
another and slaughtering when do you ever see women rolling around drunk
like they do or gambling every penny they have and losing it on horses
yes because a woman whatever she does she knows where to stop sure they
wouldnt be in the world at all only for us they dont know what it is to
be a woman and a mother how could they where would they all of them be
if they hadnt all a mother to look after them what I never had thats
why I suppose hes running wild now out at night away from his books
and studies and not living at home on account of the usual rowy house I
suppose well its a poor case that those that have a fine son like that
theyre not satisfied and I none was he not able to make one it wasnt my
fault we came together when I was watching the two dogs up in her behind
in the middle of the naked street that disheartened me altogether I
suppose I oughtnt to have buried him in that little woolly jacket I
knitted crying as I was but give it to some poor child but I knew well
Id never have another our 1st death too it was we were never the same
since O Im not going to think myself into the glooms about that any
more I wonder why he wouldnt stay the night I felt all the time it was
somebody strange he brought in instead of roving around the city meeting
God knows who nightwalkers and pickpockets his poor mother wouldnt
like that if she was alive ruining himself for life perhaps still its a
lovely hour so silent I used to love coming home after dances the air of
the night they have friends they can talk to weve none either he wants
what he wont get or its some woman ready to stick her knife in you I
hate that in women no wonder they treat us the way they do we are a
dreadful lot of bitches I suppose its all the troubles we have makes us
so snappy Im not like that he could easy have slept in there on the sofa
in the other room I suppose he was as shy as a boy he being so young
hardly 20 of me in the next room hed have heard me on the chamber arrah
what harm Dedalus I wonder its like those names in Gibraltar Delapaz
Delagracia they had the devils queer names there father Vilaplana of
Santa Maria that gave me the rosary Rosales y OReilly in the Calle las
Siete Revueltas and Pisimbo and Mrs Opisso in Governor street O what a
name Id go and drown myself in the first river if I had a name like
her O my and all the bits of streets Paradise ramp and Bedlam ramp and
Rodgers ramp and Crutchetts ramp and the devils gap steps well small
blame to me if I am a harumscarum I know I am a bit I declare to God I
dont feel a day older than then I wonder could I get my tongue round
any of the Spanish como esta usted muy bien gracias y usted see I havent
forgotten it all I thought I had only for the grammar a noun is the
name of any person place or thing pity I never tried to read that novel
cantankerous Mrs Rubio lent me by Valera with the questions in it all
upside down the two ways I always knew wed go away in the end I can
tell him the Spanish and he tell me the Italian then hell see Im not
so ignorant what a pity he didnt stay Im sure the poor fellow was dead
tired and wanted a good sleep badly I could have brought him in his
breakfast in bed with a bit of toast so long as I didnt do it on
the knife for bad luck or if the woman was going her rounds with the
watercress and something nice and tasty there are a few olives in the
kitchen he might like I never could bear the look of them in Abrines
I could do the criada the room looks all right since I changed it the
other way you see something was telling me all the time Id have to
introduce myself not knowing me from Adam very funny wouldnt it Im his
wife or pretend we were in Spain with him half awake without a Gods
notion where he is dos huevos estrellados senor Lord the cracked things
come into my head sometimes itd be great fun supposing he stayed with us
why not theres the room upstairs empty and Millys bed in the back room
he could do his writing and studies at the table in there for all the
scribbling he does at it and if he wants to read in bed in the morning
like me as hes making the breakfast for I he can make it for 2 Im sure
Im not going to take in lodgers off the street for him if he takes
a gesabo of a house like this Id love to have a long talk with an
intelligent welleducated person Id have to get a nice pair of red
slippers like those Turks with the fez used to sell or yellow and a
nice semitransparent morning gown that I badly want or a peachblossom
dressing jacket like the one long ago in Walpoles only 8/6 or 18/6 Ill
just give him one more chance Ill get up early in the morning Im sick of
Cohens old bed in any case I might go over to the markets to see all
the vegetables and cabbages and tomatoes and carrots and all kinds of
splendid fruits all coming in lovely and fresh who knows whod be the 1st
man Id meet theyre out looking for it in the morning Mamy Dillon used
to say they are and the night too that was her massgoing Id love a
big juicy pear now to melt in your mouth like when I used to be in the
longing way then Ill throw him up his eggs and tea in the moustachecup
she gave him to make his mouth bigger I suppose hed like my nice cream
too I know what Ill do Ill go about rather gay not too much singing a
bit now and then mi fa pieta Masetto then Ill start dressing myself to
go out presto non son piu forte Ill put on my best shift and drawers let
him have a good eyeful out of that to make his micky stand for him Ill
let him know if thats what he wanted that his wife is I s l o fucked yes
and damn well fucked too up to my neck nearly not by him 5 or 6 times
handrunning theres the mark of his spunk on the clean sheet I wouldnt
bother to even iron it out that ought to satisfy him if you dont believe
me feel my belly unless I made him stand there and put him into me Ive a
mind to tell him every scrap and make him do it out in front of me serve
him right its all his own fault if I am an adulteress as the thing in
the gallery said O much about it if thats all the harm ever we did in
this vale of tears God knows its not much doesnt everybody only they
hide it I suppose thats what a woman is supposed to be there for or
He wouldnt have made us the way He did so attractive to men then if he
wants to kiss my bottom Ill drag open my drawers and bulge it right out
in his face as large as life he can stick his tongue 7 miles up my hole
as hes there my brown part then Ill tell him I want LI or perhaps 30/-
Ill tell him I want to buy underclothes then if he gives me that well he
wont be too bad I dont want to soak it all out of him like other women
do I could often have written out a fine cheque for myself and write his
name on it for a couple of pounds a few times he forgot to lock it up
besides he wont spend it Ill let him do it off on me behind provided he
doesnt smear all my good drawers O I suppose that cant be helped Ill do
the indifferent l or 2 questions Ill know by the answers when hes like
that he cant keep a thing back I know every turn in him Ill tighten my
bottom well and let out a few smutty words smellrump or lick my shit or
the first mad thing comes into my head then Ill suggest about yes O wait
now sonny my turn is coming Ill be quite gay and friendly over it O
but I was forgetting this bloody pest of a thing pfooh you wouldnt know
which to laugh or cry were such a mixture of plum and apple no Ill have
to wear the old things so much the better itll be more pointed hell
never know whether he did it or not there thats good enough for you
any old thing at all then Ill wipe him off me just like a business his
omission then Ill go out Ill have him eying up at the ceiling where is
she gone now make him want me thats the only way a quarter after what an
unearthly hour I suppose theyre just getting up in China now combing out
their pigtails for the day well soon have the nuns ringing the angelus
theyve nobody coming in to spoil their sleep except an odd priest or two
for his night office or the alarmclock next door at cockshout clattering
the brains out of itself let me see if I can doze off 1 2 3 4 5 what
kind of flowers are those they invented like the stars the wallpaper
in Lombard street was much nicer the apron he gave me was like that
something only I only wore it twice better lower this lamp and try again
so as I can get up early Ill go to Lambes there beside Findlaters and
get them to send us some flowers to put about the place in case he
brings him home tomorrow today I mean no no Fridays an unlucky day first
I want to do the place up someway the dust grows in it I think while Im
asleep then we can have music and cigarettes I can accompany him first I
must clean the keys of the piano with milk whatll I wear shall I wear
a white rose or those fairy cakes in Liptons I love the smell of a rich
big shop at 7 1/2d a lb or the other ones with the cherries in them
and the pinky sugar I Id a couple of lbs of those a nice plant for the
middle of the table Id get that cheaper in wait wheres this I saw them
not long ago I love flowers Id love to have the whole place swimming in
roses God of heaven theres nothing like nature the wild mountains then
the sea and the waves rushing then the beautiful country with the fields
of oats and wheat and all kinds of things and all the fine cattle going
about that would do your heart good to see rivers and lakes and flowers
all sorts of shapes and smells and colours springing up even out of the
ditches primroses and violets nature it is as for them saying theres no
God I wouldnt give a snap of my two fingers for all their learning why
dont they go and create something I often asked him atheists or whatever
they call themselves go and wash the cobbles off themselves first then
they go howling for the priest and they dying and why why because theyre
afraid of hell on account of their bad conscience ah yes I know them
well who was the first person in the universe before there was anybody
that made it all who ah that they dont know neither do I so there you
are they might as well try to stop the sun from rising tomorrow the sun
shines for you he said the day we were lying among the rhododendrons on
Howth head in the grey tweed suit and his straw hat the day I got him to
propose to me yes first I gave him the bit of seedcake out of my mouth
and it was leapyear like now yes 16 years ago my God after that long
kiss I near lost my breath yes he said I was a flower of the mountain
yes so we are flowers all a womans body yes that was one true thing he
said in his life and the sun shines for you today yes that was why I
liked him because I saw he understood or felt what a woman is and I knew
I could always get round him and I gave him all the pleasure I could
leading him on till he asked me to say yes and I wouldnt answer first
only looked out over the sea and the sky I was thinking of so many
things he didnt know of Mulvey and Mr Stanhope and Hester and father and
old captain Groves and the sailors playing all birds fly and I say stoop
and washing up dishes they called it on the pier and the sentry in front
of the governors house with the thing round his white helmet poor devil
half roasted and the Spanish girls laughing in their shawls and their
tall combs and the auctions in the morning the Greeks and the jews and
the Arabs and the devil knows who else from all the ends of Europe and
Duke street and the fowl market all clucking outside Larby Sharons
and the poor donkeys slipping half asleep and the vague fellows in the
cloaks asleep in the shade on the steps and the big wheels of the carts
of the bulls and the old castle thousands of years old yes and those
handsome Moors all in white and turbans like kings asking you to sit
down in their little bit of a shop and Ronda with the old windows of the
posadas 2 glancing eyes a lattice hid for her lover to kiss the iron
and the wineshops half open at night and the castanets and the night we
missed the boat at Algeciras the watchman going about serene with his
lamp and O that awful deepdown torrent O and the sea the sea crimson
sometimes like fire and the glorious sunsets and the figtrees in the
Alameda gardens yes and all the queer little streets and the pink
and blue and yellow houses and the rosegardens and the jessamine and
geraniums and cactuses and Gibraltar as a girl where I was a Flower
of the mountain yes when I put the rose in my hair like the Andalusian
girls used or shall I wear a red yes and how he kissed me under the
Moorish wall and I thought well as well him as another and then I asked
him with my eyes to ask again yes and then he asked me would I yes to
say yes my mountain flower and first I put my arms around him yes and
drew him down to me so he could feel my breasts all perfume yes and his
heart was going like mad and yes I said yes I will Yes.

Trieste-Zurich-Paris 1914-1921





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ulysses, by James Joyce

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ULYSSES ***

***** This file should be named 4300-8.txt or 4300-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/0/4300/

Produced by Col Choat

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
>>>>>>> Stashed changes


<<<<<<< Updated upstream
***FINIS***

=======
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
>>>>>>> Stashed changes
